

German Expressionism


The term German Expressionism refers to an aspect of international
modernism that dominated the visual arts and architecture in that country
toward the end of the Wilhelmine Empire through the early years of the
Weimar Republic (from approximately 1906 to 1922). Artists associated with
the term used a multiplicity of antinaturalist techniques to attack not
only the conventions of nineteenth century academic art but also the
conventions of a society they found repressive, materialistic, and corrupt.
Experimenting with emotive colour, form, and composition, artists such as
WASSILY KANDINSKY (fig. 1) and ERNST LUDWIG KIRCHNER (fig. 2) were
determined to communicate utopian visions synthesized from an array of
international, anti-establishment cultural and political ideologies such as
theosophy, anarchism, and socialism.

As early as 1911, critics in Germany had begun to use the term
Expressionist to refer to contemporaneous works of European art that turned
away from naturalism and Impressionism.  By the time of the 1912 Cologne
Sonderbund exhibition, its director not only described their survey of the
most recent developments of painting as Expressionismus but also emphasized
the international number of artists from France, Austro-Hungary, Russia,
Norway, in addition to Germany, who were simplifying and intensifying their
colours and forms.  Among the artists included in this exhibition were
HENRI MATISSE of the Parisian Fauves, Kirchner and ERICH HECKEL of the
Dresden/Berlin Brcke (Bridge), Kandinsky of the Munich Blaue Reiter (Blue
Rider), and CESR KLEIN of the Berlin Neue Secession.

Provincial artists such as CARL VINNEN and the general public reacted
negatively to the bright colors, flattened shapes, and distorted forms of
Expressionism, continuing a long-standing aspect of German thought in which
internationalist influences were seen as the direct cause of the decline of
German art and culture. Supportive critics, however, cited earlier
precedents such as oils by Grnewald and Michelangelo in addition to works
by contemporary northern artists such as EDVARD MUNCH to justify the anti-
naturalism of the new direction.  The art historian WILHELM WORRINGER
stressed the metaphysical values of the new artistic tendencies and urged
the study of primitive art to overcome the focus on the world of natural
appearance perpetuated by the classical-Renaissance tradition of European
art.  Artists, aware that much of the public was bewildered by their work,
felt compelled to explain their approach in essays, tracts, and manifestos.
 Periodicals such as Der Sturm (fig. 3) and Die Aktion reproduced numerous
prints from Brcke, Blaue Reiter, and Neue Secession artists, as well as
recognizing sculptors, architects, and poets as Expressionists.  Even
during the First World War, Der Sturm and its gallery continued to explain
the new tendencies as international by promoting FUTURISM and CUBISM as
part of Expressionism.

Because of the dominance of the state in artistic affairs during the
Wilhelmine Empire, visual artists as well as architects such as BRUNO TAUT
struggled to free themselves from national or state regulations that might
determine the direction and content of their works.  Social anarchism, with
its promise of mutual help and a state that would wither away, set the
frame for many Expressionists utopian and optimistic estimate of the
possibilities of individual creativity.  At the same time, most endeavoured
to explore communal activities and to weigh their responsibility to the
public.

After the First World War
The First World War became a catalyst for an even more activist stance
among many Expressionists.  With the collapse of Imperial rule in 1918 and
the formation of the Weimar Republic, many artists who had been connected
to Expressionist groups before the War, established new organizations such
as the Arbeitsrat fr Kunst (Work Council for Art) (fig. 4) and the
Novembergruppe (November group) which initially supported free art
education, public museums, and local participation in housing and other
public projects.  Now infused with French Cubism and Italian Futurism,
Expressionism became a visual signifier for the new Republic with its
opposition to the Imperial past and evocation of internationalist
innovation.  But the anti-naturalism that most Expressionists believed
would stimulate change met with resistance from the workers they wishes to
inspire.  As the strikes and street battles of 1919 weakened the Republic,
many artists and critics became disillusioned with the governing Social
Democrats and turned dramatically against the CUBO-EXPRESSIONIST style
manifested in election posters (fig. 5) and other visual images of the
Republic commissioned by the majority party.  Communists such as GEORGE
GROSZ and JOHN HEARTFIELD distanced themselves from their Expressionist
past and many of the original supporters of Expressionism, such as
Worringer, wrote of its demise.  Yet, during the 1920s, the urban middle
class embraced the stylistic manifestations of Expressionism particularly
in theater design and film and references to Expressionism survived in the
visual manifestations of DADA and NEUE SACHLICHKEIT (New Objectivity).

During the 1930s, Expressionism was attacked by both the extreme right and
left. The Marxist critic GEORG LUKCS severely critiqued Expressionism and
modernism for its fragmented, abstracted forms and inability to communicate
to the masses, and his 1934 essay set the tone for later criticisms of
Expressionism during the 1980s. The National Socialist condemnation of
Expressionism and modernism reached its apogee with the 1937-38 traveling
exhibition of Entartete Kunst (Degenerate Art).

With the conclusion of the Second World War, Expressionism became
resurrected in Germany and the United States as an antipode to the
authoritarian realisms of both Soviet and National Socialist regimes.  In
the 1950s, art historians and critics began to publish studies of German
Expressionism before the First World War, but scholars did not begin to
explore the second generation of Expressionists until the 1970s and 1980s.
Nonetheless, not until the end of the last century and the beginning of the
twenty-first, have scholars asked why museums in the United States and
England have favored Cubism over its modernist cousin, Expressionism, in
exploring the trajectory of modern art.


References and further reading:

Barron, S. (1997) German Expressionism: Art and Society, New York: Rizzoli.

Benson,   T.   (2001)   Expressionist   Utopias:    Paradise,    Metropolis,
Architectural Fantasy, Los Angeles: Los Angeles County Museum of Art.

 (1989) German Expressionist Prints and Drawings, The Robert Gore Rifkind
Center for German Expressionist Studies, 2 vols., Los Angeles: Los Angeles
County Museum of Art.

Junge, H. (ed.) (1992) Avantgarde und Publikum: Zur Rezeption
avantgardistisch Kunst in Deutschland 1905-1933, Cologne: Bhlau.

Long, R-C W. (ed.) (1993) German Expressionism: Documents from the End of
the Wilhelmine Empire to the Rise of National Socialism, New York: G.K.
Hall; paperback edition, Berkeley: University of California Press, 1995;
esp. essays by R. Reiche and W.Worringer,16-18 and 9-13.

Raabe, P. (1964) Die Zeitschriften und Sammulungen des literarischen
Expressionismus, Stuttgart: J. B. Metzlersche Verlag.

Raabe, P. (1972) Index Expressionismus, 18 vols., Neudeln, Liechtenstein:
Kraus Thomson.

West, S. (2000) The Visual Arts in Germany 1890-1937: Utopia and Despair,
New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.

Weikop, C. (ed.) (2011) New Perspectives on Brcke Expressionism: Bridging
History, Farnham, Surrey, UK: Ashgate; esp. essays by Long and Weikop, 11-
30, 237-276.


Images:

[pic]
Fig. 1: Wassily Kandinsky, Improvisation 30, 1913, oil on canvas,The Art
Institute of Chicago, Arthur Jerome Eddy Memorial Collection.

[pic]
Fig. 2: E. L. Kirchner, Nudes in a Landscape, 1910, oil on canvas.

[pic]
Fig.3: Max Pechstein,  1911, color woodcut, appearing in Der Sturm, January
1912.

[pic]
Fig. 4: Max Pechstein, Cover of leaflet for Arbeitsrat fr Kunst, 1919

[pic]
Fig. 5: Cesr Klein, Election Poster, 1919, color lithograph

