
Expressionism was an avant-garde movement in German literature that lasted
from approximately 1910 to 1925 and was supported by a generation of young
writers. Like their visual artist counterparts, they were Bborn in the
1880s and 1890s, they opposed the values of pre-war Wilhelminian society,
and reacted to the developments of modern urban civilisation. By
representing their perceptions and experiences in an anti-mimetic, highly
subjective manner, Expressionist writers tried to trigger their readers
imaginations and to evoke their emotions. Albeit connected  in those
central lines of theme and effect, the broad variety of style and form to
be found in all literary genres makes it notoriously difficult to find a
widely accepted definition of Expressionism, a problem mostly put aside
today by regarding Expressionist literature as a forerunner of postmodern
heterogeneity.

In poetry, the effects of urbanization and mechanization were expressed by
lining up disparate images in paratactical style (Reihungsstil), showing
the new perceptional demands caused by acceleration, new technologies and
media (see the poems of Jakob van Hoddis, Alfred Lichtenstein and Ernst
Blass), leading to the dissociation of self (Ich-Dissoziation, Vietta)
and to the impersonality of a techniciszed society (Gottfried Benn,
Morgue-poetry). Symbolic imagery and synaesthesia are characteristics of
the poetry of Else Lasker-Schler, Georg Heym, Georg Trakl, and Ernst
Stadler, who all of whom wrote poems in regular form and rhyme as well as
free verse-poetry., whereas By contrast, August Stramms poems disposed of
conventional language structures.

Authors of Expressionist prose likewise discharged conventional patterns of
narration and tried new techniques like stream of consciousness and
reflective prose (Reflexionsprosa), descending into the minds of their
protagonists (Gottfried Benn, Gehirne, 1916; Carl Einstein, Bebuquin oder
die Dilettanten des Wunders/Bebuquin or the Dilettantes of Miracle, novel,
1912), often criminals or mentally insane (Georg Heym, Der Dieb/The Thief
and Der Irre/The Madman, 1912; Alfred Dblin, Die Ermordung einer
Butterblume/Murder of a Buttercup, 1909). The Prague author Franz Kafka is
often deemed an Expressionist because of his nightmarish visions of
individuals lost in bureaucracy and mechaniszation as in the stories Die
Verwandlung [(The Transformation or The Metamorphosis], (1915) and In der
Strafkolonie [(In the Penal Settlement], (1919) and in the novels Der
Process [(The Trial], (1925) and Das Schloss [(The Castle], (1926).

Reinhard Johannes Sorge was the first to deal with the generation conflict
in drama, showing the clash of values in Wilhelminian society in a family
context in Der Bettler [(The Beggar], (written 1911, first staged 1917), a
subject taken up for example by Walter Hasenclever (Der Sohn/The Son,
1914). The plays of Carl Sternheim (Der Snob/The Snob, 1912) are acid
satires on outmoded bourgeois values, whereas other dramatists denounce the
inhumanity of mechanization and individual powerlessness, for example Georg
Kaiser (Gas-Trilogie/Gas Trilogy, 1917-1920) and Ernst Toller (Masse
Mensch/Man and the Masses, 1919; Die Maschinenstrmer/The Machine Wreckers,
1922), the latter with a highly political stance. Formally many
Expressionist plays consist of a series of episodes, or stations, held
together only by a central figure (Stationendrama). Characteriszed by
declamation and distorted language Expressionist drama tends to reduce
characters to mere types or abstractions (August Stramm, Krfte/Forces,
1915). Expressionist theatre is often experimental, for example in
depicting violence (Oskar Kokoschka, Mrder, Hoffnung der Frauen/Murderer,
the Womens Hope, 1909) or in trying to generate a synthesis of the arts
(Gesamtkunstwerk; Wassily Kandinsky, Der gelbe Klang/The Yellow Clang,
1909).

Main influences on Expressionist literature were Sigmund Freuds
psychological insights and especially Friedrich Nietzsches philosophy,
i.e. his nihilistic diagnosis of human life and transcendental emptiness
often succinctly conveyed in the mantra (God is dead) as well as his
hymnic vitalism (Also sprach Zarathustra/Thus Spake Zarathustra, 1883/85),
taken up by Expressionism as antagonism between apocalyptic visions of
modern civilisation versus renewal and rebirth of man.

Given that Expressionism was an urban movement, writers found opportunities
to publish their texts or to present them at lectures and recitals
associated with places like Munich, Leipzig, Dresden, Vienna and,
especially, Berlin, one of the fastest-growing cities of the time. Here the
writers found opportunities to publish their texts or to present them at
lectures and recitals. Many key texts of Expressionism could first be read
in the leading periodicals of the movement, such as Der Sturm, published by
Herwarth Walden as a platform of aesthetic discussion, Franz Pfemfertss
politically oriented Die Aktion or Ren Schickeles Die weien Bltter.

The impact of modern technical warfare and the millions of dead on the
battlefields of the First World War (1914-1918), where many Expressionist
writers lost their lives, became central subjects of Expressionist
literature, giving rise to pacifist appeals and to the politically engaged
messianic-activist Expressionism of the post-war years. With the rise of
National Socialism in 1933 Expressionist literature was banned, not to be
rediscovered until after the Second World War, when texts were republished
that have since become accepted as canonical, for example the poetry
collection Menschheitsdmmerung/Dawn of Humanity (1919; re-edited 1959).


The general decline of Expressionism by the mid-1920s was furthered by the
implausibility and vagueness of the messianic stance (see for example poems
of Franz Werfel or Ludwig Rubiner) and the rise of new stylistic concepts
(Dada, Neue Sachlichkeit).  With the rise of National Socialism in 1933
Expressionist literature was banned, not to be rediscovered until after the
Second World War, when texts were republished that have since become
accepted as canonical, for example the poetry collection
Menschheitsdmmerung/Dawn of Humanity (1919; re-edited 1959).

Research of the last three decades has stressed the importance of gender
themes in Expressionism and the role of female writers such as Henriette
Hardenberg as well as the significance of lesser-known authors like Hermann
Kasack or Georg Kulka who were forgotten because their texts had not been
included in the major anthologies of their time.

Key Works:

Kurt Pinthus, ed. (1919) Menschheitsdmmerung. Symphonie jngster Dichtung.
Re-edited 1959 as Menschheitsdmmerung.  Ein Dokument des Expressionismus
(Dawn of Humanity: A Document of Expressionism, 1994)
Walter Sokel, ed. (1963, 1984) Anthology of German Expressionist Drama: A
Prelude to the Absurd, Ithaca/London: Cornell UP.
Ernst Schrer, ed. (1997) German Expressionist Plays, New York: Continuum.
Fritz Martini, ed. (1970) Prosa des Expressionismus, Stuttgart: Reclam.

Secondary Literature:

Anz, Thomas (2002) Literatur des Expressionismus, Stuttgart/Weimar:
Metzler.
Bogner, Ralf Georg (2005) Einfhrung in die Literatur des Expressionismus,
Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft.
Donahue, Neil H. (ed.) (2005) A companion to the literature of German
Expressionism, Columbia, SC: Camden House.
Murphy, Richard (1999) Theorizing the Avant-Garde: Modernism,
Expressionism, and the Problem of Postmodernity, Cambridge: Cambridge UP.
Vietta, Silvio, Hans-Georg Kemper (1975) Expressionismus, Munich: Fink.

