Taylor & Francis – Encyclopedia of Modernism



About you

[Salutation]

Joseph 

[Middle name]

Hartman



[Enter your biography]



[Enter the institution with which you are affiliated]



Your article

Eduardo Abela (1889-1965)

[Enter any variant forms of your headword – OPTIONAL]

[Enter an abstract for your article]

Cuban artist and cartoonist Eduardo Abela is considered an early progenitor of the Cuban Vanguardia, a twentieth-century avant-garde art movement that incorporated European modernist techniques, such as Expressionism, Cubism, and Surrealism, into synthetic images of Cuba’s multifaceted culture. Like many of his colleagues, Abela explored Cuban themes in his art while living abroad in Spain and Paris in the 1920s. During his European residency, Abela created nostalgic and somewhat stereotypical images of Cuba’s rural landscape, peasantry, and Afro-Cuban populations. Abela’s Afro-Cuban themed works, in particular, came at the height of “negro fashion” in France. Unlike Cuban contemporary Wifredo Lam, who focused on affirming his own Afro-Cuban identity, Abela’s paintings from this period are most often associated with a Eurocentric view of primitivism; a vision of things African as earthy, sensual, and exotic. After his return to Cuba, Abela served as a cartoonist for the Cuban newspaper El Diario del Marina from 1930 until 1934. During this period in his career, Abela created acerbic editorial cartoons as a protest against the notorious President-cum-Dictator Gerardo Machado. Abela later founded a short-lived art studio called the Free Studio of Painting and Sculpture in 1937; and served as Cuba’s cultural attaché to Mexico from1941 to 1946 and to Guatemala from 1947 to 1952. He continued to paint until his death in 1965.		

Many of Abela’s iconic paintings come from his studies in Paris during the late 1920s. Abela’s distance from home imbued these early works with a sense of exoticism, evident in his 1928 oil painting entitled El Gallo Místico (The Mystic Rooster). This expressionistic work depicts a chicken being sacrificed by a circle of Afro-Cuban religious practitioners. Unlike the realists and romantics that dominated Cuba’s academic art scene during the nineteenth century, Abela aimed to reflect the energy of dance and sacrifice without burdening the viewer with an abundance of detail. His 1928 work is a blend of neutral grays, blacks, and browns in the background with vibrant reds, oranges, blues, and greens that accentuate his figures in the foreground.  Later, in Cuba, Abela worked prolifically as a professional cartoonist. He was most famous for his criollo, or creole, character, “El Bobo,” a caricature that embodied many of the characteristics of a Shakespearian fool. With a vacant gaze and naïve antics, “El Bobo” spoke truth to power during the bloody reign of Gerardo Machado, a period in which government censorship otherwise weakened the criticality of the Cuban press. At the end of the 1930s, Abela returned to painting. He began using a naturalistic style inspired by early Italian Renaissance painting and the Mexican muralist movement. His works from this period again focused on an idealized view of the Cuban peasant and countryside, as seen in his famous painting of 1938 Los Guajiros , a scene that depicts white rural farmer workers with a measure of Classical sobriety blended with expressionism and social realism. Abela returned to these rural and Afro-Cuban themes throughout his career. In a broader national discourse, his work was part and parcel of an effort to define Cuban national identity in the mid-twentieth century; an effort taken on by poets, artists, architects, writers, and politicians with earnest in the decades following Cuba’s independence from Spain in 1902. 

Image: 

List of Works:

Eduardo Abela, El Triunfo de la Rumba (The Triumph of the Rumba), ca. 1928, oil on canvas, 25.5 x 21.25 inches, Museo Nacional de Cuba, Havana. 

Eduardo Abela, El gallo místico (The Mystic Rooster), ca. 1928, oil on canvas, 26 x 21.5 inches, Museo Nacional de Cuba, Havana

Eduardo Abela, Los Guajiros (Peasants), 1938, oil on canvas, 33 x 28 inches, Museo Nacional de Cuba, Havana.  

Further reading:



Abela, Eduardo. (1929) “Indagación: Que debe ser el arte americano?” Revista de Avance 3: 361. 

Gutiérrez Pérez, Jose A. and Ofilia Flores Valdés. (2005). Eduardo Abela. La Habana: Editorial de Ciencias Sociales.

Martínez, Juan A. (1994) Cuban Art and National Identity: The Vanguardia Painters, 1927-1950. Gainesville: University Press of Florida.

Seoane Gallo, José. (1986) Eduardo Abela cerca del cerco. Havana: Editorial letras Cubanas, 1986. 

Vásquez Díaz, Ramón. (1979) “Eduaro Abela, El Gallo Mistico, ca. 1928.” In Muestra del Mes. Havana: Museo Nacional. 

Torriente, Loló de la. (1956) “El mundo esoñado de Abela.” Revista del Instituto Nacional de Cultura, 1: 41-56.