Taylor & Francis – Encyclopedia of Modernism



About you

[Salutation]

Rachel

[Middle name]

Boate



[Enter your biography]



New York University



Your article

Abstraction-Création

Abstraction-Création was a collective of abstract artists active in Paris until 1936. Beginning in 1931, the founding committee was composed of Theo Van Doesburg, Jean Arp, Albert Gleizes, Jean Hélion, Auguste Herbin, František Kupka, Léon Arthur Tutundjian, Georges Valmier, and Georges Vantongerloo. Featuring reproductions of abstract paintings, sculpture, photography, and artists’ statements, participating artists were represented through the publication of the annual journal Abstraction, Création, Art Non-Figuratif (1932-1936). Abstraction-Création aimed to promote an international network of abstract artists, while simultaneously forming an aesthetic counterpoint to the increasing prevalence of Surrealism and Social Realism in France. Following the failure of the narrowly conceived abstract groups Art Concret and Cercle et Carré in 1930, Abstraction-Création pinpointed non-figuration as the only criterion for membership. This pluralist conception of abstraction reflected an intentionally democratic cultural position in contrast to the totalitarian regimes emerging elsewhere in Europe throughout the 1930s. At its peak, well-known abstractionist contributing members included Piet Mondrian, Vasily Kandinsky, Lázló Moholy-Nagy, Kurt Schwitters, Jacques Villon, Willi Baumeister, and Alexander Calder. A yearlong exhibition of Abstraction-Création artworks began in December 1933 on the ground floor of 44 Avenue de Wagram, Paris. The 1935 magazine issue claimed a membership of over 400 individuals hailing from seventeen countries outside of France.

Abstraction-Création was a collective of abstract artists active in Paris until 1936. Beginning in 1931, the founding committee was composed of Theo Van Doesburg, Jean Arp, Albert Gleizes, Jean Hélion, Auguste Herbin, František Kupka, Léon Arthur Tutundjian, Georges Valmier, and Georges Vantongerloo. Featuring reproductions of abstract paintings, sculpture, photography, and artists’ statements, participating artists were represented through the publication of the annual journal Abstraction, Création, Art Non-Figuratif (1932-1936). Abstraction-Création aimed to promote an international network of abstract artists, while simultaneously forming an aesthetic counterpoint to the increasing prevalence of Surrealism and Social Realism in France. Following the failure of the narrowly conceived abstract groups Art Concret and Cercle et Carré in 1930, Abstraction-Création pinpointed non-figuration as the only criterion for membership. This pluralist conception of abstraction reflected an intentionally democratic cultural position in contrast to the totalitarian regimes emerging elsewhere in Europe throughout the 1930s. At its peak, well-known abstractionist contributing members included Piet Mondrian, Vasily Kandinsky, Lázló Moholy-Nagy, Kurt Schwitters, Jacques Villon, Willi Baumeister, and Alexander Calder. A yearlong exhibition of Abstraction-Création artworks began in December 1933 on the ground floor of 44 Avenue de Wagram, Paris. The 1935 magazine issue claimed a membership of over 400 individuals hailing from seventeen countries outside of France.



[Image: Equilibrium.jpg]

Figure 1 Jean Hélion, Equilibrium (Equilibre), 1933-1934. Oil on canvas, 38 3/8 x 51 5/8 inches (97.4 x 131.2 cm). Solomon R. Guggenheim Foundation, Peggy Guggenheim Collection, Venice 76.2553.44 © 

2014 Artists Rights Society (ARS), New York/ADAGP, Paris.

http://www.guggenheim.org/new-york/collections/collection-online/artwork/1637



As turbulence in the European political landscape increased in the years leading up to World War II, official cultural institutions in France called for accessible aesthetic modes. The idealism traditionally associated with artistic abstraction resulted in accusations from the Surrealists that both Art Concret and Cercle et Carré were examples of elitist, bourgeois aestheticism. To counter these claims, Abstraction-Création vowed to address the social question at its inception, equating non-figurative art with a blueprint for a new, universal, and collectively based social paradigm. Hélion published the group’s manifesto in the first issue of the group’s journal, where he explained that the terms Abstraction and Création indicated two conduits for arriving at non-figuration. Abstraction, he argued, referred to artists who achieved non-figuration by abstracting or distilling forms inspired by nature, such as those working in the veins of late Cubism or Biomorphism (Hélion’s depictions of curving arcs and surface tensions, for example, or Robert Delaunay’s light infused discs drawn from real world observations). Création, on the other hand, denoted those who attained non-figuration through additive constructions of pure geometric elements, following the models of De Stijl, Constructivism or Bauhaus design principles (Mondrian’s architectonic grids, or Vantongerloo’s geometric compositions based on mathematical units, for example). Despite different working methods, artists were generally unified by their identification of abstraction with notions of creative freedom. 



[Image: Abstraction.jpg]

Figure 2 Abstraction-Création, Art Non-Figuratif, 1932, 1935, 1936

From Hans (Jean) Arp Collection (Collection of Artists’ Books)

Object number: KBA 944(1-3)

Foundation Stedelijk Museum Amsterdam

Original publication by Edition les tendances nouvelles, Paris



http://www.stedelijkmuseum.nl/en/artwork/38762-abstraction-creation-art-non-figuratif



Frustrated by a lack of seriousness, an overly broad mandate, and a noticeable decline in the quality of presented works, many reputable artists associated with Abstract-Création abandoned the group. Financial difficulties coupled with increasing socio-political hostilities towards abstraction led to the final publication of Abstraction, Création, Art Non-Figuratif in 1936, and the group formally disbanded in 1937. Following the movement’s collapse, a willingness to broaden the international community of abstract artists carried over into England and the United States. Myfanwy Piper launched Axis magazine (1935-1937), while Anton Pevsner and Naum Gabo created Circle (1937) in London. In the United States, Jean Arp and Sophie-Tauber Arp pursued abstraction through the publication of the review Plastique (1937). Jean Hélion helped found the American Abstract Artists in New York City in 1936, a new iteration of Abstraction-Création in North America that still exists. 

Further reading:

 (Abstraction, Création 1931-1936)



(Abstraction, Création, Art Non-Figuratif: Authorized Reprint Edition of original issues 1-5: 1932-36 )



(Abstraction Géometrique, Art Concret, Abstraction Création: Biennale des Antiquaires)



(Kaplan)



(Lubar)



(Paris: Arte Abstractor, Arte Concreto, Cercle et Carré 1930)