
Abstract Expressionism in the Philippines

      Abstract Expressionism in the Philippines was one of many post-WWII
movements that grew out of a desire to remain current with international
artistic trends. Increased access to Western state grants and educational
opportunities in the Philippines former colonising power, the United
States, helped to deliver many of the countrys most esteemed artists a
formal education. For instance, Jose Joya (1931- 1995) and Lee Aguinaldo
(1933- 2007) studied at the Cranbrook Academy of Art in Michigan and the
Culver Military Academy in Indiana respectively. The Filipino audience
perceived abstraction as failed mimetic representation, and public
reception of abstract art was characterized by indifference or outright
antagonism, even during the 1970s as the Philippine art market began to
open up to abstraction. However, while abstraction was regarded as purely
decorative in some circles, it was seen as cerebral in others. In examining
intersections between modern-contemporary expression and pre-colonial
visual languages, some critics have argued that abstraction demonstrates
affinities with forms present in textile and mat weaving from both Northern
and Southern upland and riverine ethnolinguistic communities, as well as in
the architecture, dress patterns, metal work and woodcraft of Muslim and
Lumad communities in Mindanao.
      Jose Joya was an important figure in the development of Abstract
Expressionism in the Philippines. Joya had significant influence over
successive generations of abstract-expressionist painters through his
dedication to teaching, especially at the University of the Philippines
College of Fine Arts. His teaching post allowed him to expand his network
outside Manila, specifically through the Visayas (via University of the
Philippines Cebu College for instance). Other key artist-art-educators from
the Philippines include Florencio Concepcion and Constancio Bernardo.
Concepcion took his postgraduate studies at the Accademia di Belle Arte in
Rome and served as Dean of the University of the East College of Fine Arts.
Bernardo studied with Joseph Albers at Yale University and later taught art
at University of the Philippines. Fernando Zobel was a much earlier artist-
art educator who similarly brought the influence of western abstract
expressionist art to the Philippines when he returned to the Philippines
shortly after graduating from Harvard University in 1949. Zobel eventually
settled in Spain where he established the Museum of Spanish Abstract Art in
Cuenca. However, before migrating to Spain, Zobel bequeathed his seminal
collection of early Philippine modernist art to the Ateneo Art Gallery and
nurtured a progeny of modernist advocate-critics including Emmanuel Torres
and Leonidas Benesa.
      Filipino critics including Torres suggest Zobels Abstract
Expressionist period occurred between 1954-1957 when he was thought to have
taken a musical approach to painting, before shifting to a chromatically
streamlined calligraphic phase. More evident traces of gestural North
American Abstract Expressionism are found in the work of Joya and Bernardo,
whose paintings often radiate from a compositional core. The inclination to
build compositions around masses of texture and colour is also demonstrated
in the works Aguinaldo produced during the early 1960s before he took to a
more overtly geometric stream of abstraction from the late 1960s up until
his death. A later generation of practitioners whose collective works
demonstrate an unconscious shift across various streams of abstraction
include artists such as J. Elizalde Navarro, Ray Albano, Charito Bitanga,
Phyllis Zaballero, Edwin Wilwayco, Oscar Villamiel, Eghai Roxas, among many
others.
      One key point of divergence between Philippine Abstract Expressionism
and its American counterpart is the formers casual regard for gestural
painting. Unlike much of the debate that surrounded the work of Northern
American Abstract Expressionists, particularly Jackson Pollock who had been
propped up as the epitome of creative spontaneity, very little critical
attention was paid to how Philippine Abstract Expressionism seemed
unburdened by the desire to draw from primal impulses, how in effect, the
work was undertaken in a more calculated manner. Benesa, a key Filipino
modernist critic describing Joya states: A number of the drawings and
sketches in the mid-sixties show that, however spontaneous and
expressionistic the gestures of the artist may appear in the final work, in
the tradition of action painting, they have been rehearsed beforehand
through the various disciplines of linear melody and tonal rhythm. Despite
his inclination toward premeditation, Joya is still generally upheld as
representative of his generation of Philippine abstractionists, as he
eventually underwent a degree of stylistic liberation, which critics
suggest is evidenced in the diminished stiffness in his drawing hand
rendered salient in his technique following his departure from the
Philippines to pursue further studies in Europe and the US. Benesa partly
credits Joyas studies overseas for his more visibly organic and charged
approach to drawing. Joyas shift toward using rivulets of auto-creative
line is seen as part of his shift toward drawing from an inward impulse,
and privileging an inner reality, as opposed to external or physical one.
      [pic]
Jose Joya, Hills of Nikko, 1964, 172 x 198.8 cm, Collection of National
Museum of the Philippines
      Substantial anthropological and cultural scholarship has critically
examined whether global pockets of Abstract Expressionism are merely
derivative of American Abstract Expressionism. These critical accounts have
pointed out that, while Abstract Expressionism has become enfolded into a
canon of art history subjecting it to accounts of one-way transfer from the
West to other parts of the world. However, prominent Western Abstract
Expressionist artists have expressed a debt to Asian calligraphic scroll
painting. It is this assertion, encumbered with the postcolonial thrust to
establish national identity, which appears to have persuaded artists
including Joya to modify his approach to abstraction, though arguably in a
mitigated sense, to a referential phase. Joya, for instance, rendered
overtly Filipino icons, like the Muslim Torogan (1985), using reductive
line and colour.  Current scholarship does seem to settle these art
historical questions by arguing that a form of artistic poaching may have
unconsciously influenced the way artists negotiated issues of origination.
The logic proposed is that they were first given to a comparatively more
geometric stream of abstraction and then eventually moved to a degree of
symbology which the critic Alice Guillermo attributes to cabalistic and
mandala motifs coming out of a growing interest in pre-colonial motifs
which became more widely circulated post WWII onward.
References and further reading
___(1973) Joya Drawings, Manila:  Vera Reyes, Inc.  (With an extensive
introduction by Leonidas Benesa.)
----(1996)  Joya, Manila:  D. Baldovino Enterprises.  (This monograph on
the National Artist most associated with Philippine Abstract Expressionism
includes a foreword by National Artist for Literature Francisco Arcellana
and color-plates of a range of the artists body of work.  The publication
is released through his brother-in-laws office.)
Beltran, H. Jr. (Ed.) (2003) The National Artists of the Philippines 1999-
2003 Volume 2, Manila:  National Commission for Culture and the Arts.
(This contains an essay on Jose Joya, Epitome of Philippine Abstraction
by Dr. Alice Guillermo).
Gatbonton, J. (Ed) (1992) Art Philippines, Manila:  The Crucible Workshop.
(Traces the rise of Philippine abstraction more definitively to post-WWII
and the emergence  of Neo-Realism and consequent influx of information on
international modernist tendencies.  This case is made primarily by the
essay on the 1950s written by the critic, Emmanuel Torres).
Herrera, M.V., Chikiamco, C. et al.  (2011)  The Life and Art of Lee
Aguinaldo.   Manila:  Vibal Foundation.  (A comprehensive monograph on one
of the two major proponents of Philippine Abstract Expressionism.)
Ledesma, P. K. and Guerrero, A. (1974) The Struggle for Philippine Art,
Manila: Purita Kalaw Ledesma.  (An embedded account of the emergent years
of Philippine modernism from the pioneering head of the Art Association of
the Philippines).
Reyes, C. (1989) Conversations on Philippine Art, Manila: Cultural Center
of the Philippines.  (Substantial interviews on stylistic development with
artists including Lee Aguinaldo and Jose Joya, covers an account of Joyas
formative years while on grants in Europe and America).
Torres, E. (1994) Philippine Abstract Painting, Manila:  Cultural Centre of
the Philippines.   (Post-exhibit publication in line with the exhibition
Fifty Years of Philippine Abstract Painting held at the CCP from October-
December 1991).


