
Author: Rhoda Woets

r.woets@vu.nl

Word count: 997



Achimota School

The majority of Ghanas modern art pioneers received their art education at
Achimota School in the Gold Coast, now Ghana. Achimota School contributed
in an important way to the formation of modern art in Ghana. Students
trained at the Achimota Teacher Training Department spread new ideas about
art and art education at the schools where they later worked. The
discursive fields in which modern visual artists came to discuss their work
following independence were embedded in a colonial past in which European
art teachers at Achimota had positioned African tradition as both preceding
and opposed to modernity. Just like the art teachers at Achimota, modern
artists deeply admired primitive art and considered local art forms to
have roots stretching into a timeless past. Modern artist were in this
regard influenced by their education at Achimota School as well as by
nationalist ideologies that fostered pride in an African cultural past.
Among the schools most notable students are Oku Ampofo (1908-1998),
Emmanuel Asihene (1915-2001), Amon Kotei (1915-2011), Saka Acquaye (1915-
2007), Kofi Antubam (1922-1964), Theodosia Akoh (1922) and Vincent Kofi
(1923-1974).

The teaching methodology of the European heads of the art department in
Achimota was grounded in a growing admiration for African tradition and
African primitive art during the late colonial period.. Their way of
looking at art was, furthermore, influenced by the Arts and Crafts Movement
in Europe, which was characteriszed by a romantic view of crafts and called
for an enhancement of their status.

Achimota School was officially opened in 1927. The coeducational boarding
school was located about six miles north of Accra in a quiet rural setting,
and eventually offered education from kindergarten up to the Teacher
Training Department and university classes. In promoting Indirect Rule, the
British administration held that progress in the Gold Coast could only be
attained if existing African beliefs and practices were respected and
encouraged. Achimotas founders were worried that the future anglicized and
Christian leaders that were trained in the School might not understand and
respect the semi-literate and illiterate masses that they would be working
with in rural areas. Achimotas founders aimed to counter the danger of
cultural alienation by introducing African components in the Schools
curriculum such as the study of local languages, African music and dance as
well as crafts. This meant that the European art teachers were hired
precisely because their romantic view of African art fitted into the
conceptual framework of the school itself.

The successive European heads of the art department, such as George
Stevens, Gabriel Pippet and Herbert Meyerowitz, sought to create a modern
African art style that gave expression to colonial processes of
Europeanization. Their painting and drawing classes reflected European
early modernist art doctrines. The representational drawings and paintings
of their students often depicted landscapes, portraits or narrative scenes
from campus and village life in which values such as correct body
proportions and perspective stood central. At the same time, the art
teachers inculcated in pupils the idea of the intrinsic value of what they
termed African art, art of the villages, primitive art, Negro art
or simply crafts. Much like modern artists in independent Ghana would
later practice, the art teachers presented local art forms, such as
carving, pottery and weaving, as part of valuable African traditions. The
teachers located such traditions in a timeless past and pitted them against
modernity. The students at Achimota School learned to value aesthetic
traditions in the art classes through the study and recreation of objects
such as woven cloths, wooden chiefs stools and ceramic pots. To this end,
some heads of the art department organized art classes where students were
trained by local carvers and weavers. The objects that the students
produced in the art classes were removed from their original cultural
context and refashioned as crafts. Students, eager to leave the pagan
past behind and become modern subjects, were not always enthusiastic
about their teachers paternalistic efforts to open their eyes to the
beauty of African art forms. Gabriel Pippet taught at Achimota from 1930 to
1936. He advised his male students, as he wrote in a book chapter on his
experiences at Achimota School, to do something else, when his students
wanted to carve models of airplanes and automobiles instead of animals,
state swords or wooden combs.

In January 1952 the Arts and Crafts Programme at Achimota School was
transferred with its entire European and African staff to the newly built
University in Kumasi, where it constituted the autonomous School of Fine
Arts. School subjects reflected those taught at Achimota and included
Poster Design, Figure Composition, Life Drawing, Graphic Art, Pottery and
Ceramics, and Textile Design. The African curriculum at Achimota, which was
intended to foster among young Africans an appreciation of their native
culture, is a prime example of a colonial-sponsored initiative which
romanticized traditional culture in much the same way as modern artists
would later do around the time of independence. However, modern artists in
independent Ghana sought inspiration in African sculptures, textiles and
symbols (partly) for different reasons. Each in their own way, the
pioneering modern artists of Ghana used African art forms to resist
colonialism, create a pan-African identity and present Ghana on a world
stage as a modern nation with its own unique history and culture.




References and further reading

This text for this entry is partly cited from Rhoda Woets article The Re-
creation of Modern and African Art at Achimota School in the Gold Coast
(1927-1952), submitted to JAH: Journal of African History.

Kwami, Atta (2013), Kumasi Realism 1951-2007. An African Modernism. London:
Hurst & Company

Seidou, kr kach (2006), Theoretical Foundations of the KNUST Painting
Programme: A Philosophical Inquiry and its Contextual Relevance in Ghanaian
Culture. Unpublished PhD-thesis. Kumasi: Kwame Nkrumah University of
Science and Technology







Images




                                    [pic]

  The Administration Block, Achimota School, Accra, Ghana. Photograph taken
                            by author, July 2008.








                                    [pic]

Art students at work at Achimota College in the 1940s, photograph taken by
Margot Lubinski. Courtesy of Cambridge University Library/ Institute of
Education Collection, reference Y3011U/235.

URL (for reproduction rights):
http://www.lib.cam.ac.uk/deptserv/imagingservices/reproductionrights.html




                                    [pic]

Ceramic Research and pottery at Achimota College in the 1940s, photograph
by Margot Lubinski. Courtesy of Cambridge University Library/ Institute of
Education Collection, reference Y3011U/236.

URL (for reproduction rights):
http://www.lib.cam.ac.uk/deptserv/imagingservices/reproductionrights.html



                                    [pic]

George A. Stevens (Art teacher at Achimota School from 1927-1929), Portrait
of a Fanti girl (year unknown).

Source: Stevens, George A. (1962), Go Suku, Savy book and get sense In:
Listener, Feb.22, pp. 334-336.



