Taylor & Francis – Encyclopedia of Modernism



About you

[Salutation]

Hiroki

[Middle name]

Yoshikuni



[Enter your biography]



東京大学 Tōkyō daigaku [The University of Tokyo] 



Your article

	Adams, Henry (1838–1918)	

[Enter any variant forms of your headword – OPTIONAL]

Although he was known as a historian during his lifetime, Henry Adams — like Henry James — is often seen as an American precursor to Modernism. This is mainly due to his autobiography, The Education of Henry Adams. His autobiography not only registers an aristocratic intellectual’s despair at the loss of ideals in the transformation of American society but, written in the third person, also secures a distance from that despair in order to observe it self-consciously and ironically. After his death, Adams’ literary significance was appreciated by new critics, such as Yvor Winters and R. P. Blackmur.



Adams was a great grandson of the second president of the United States, John Adams, and a grandson of the sixth president, John Quincy Adams. He was educated at Harvard University and later in Germany. During the American Civil War he served in London as a private secretary for his father. After teaching history at Harvard and editing the North American Review, he settled in Washington D.C., researching American history (which led to The Life of Albert Gallatin and History of the United States of America), and making his house a salon of politicians and intellectuals. Works created during this period include two novels, Democracy and Esther, both of which portray the vicissitudes of ideals in contemporary America through the heroines’ adventures.

Although he was known as a historian during his lifetime, Henry Adams — like Henry James — is often seen as an American precursor to Modernism. This is mainly due to his autobiography, The Education of Henry Adams. His autobiography not only registers an aristocratic intellectual’s despair at the loss of ideals in the transformation of American society but, written in the third person, also secures a distance from that despair in order to observe it self-consciously and ironically. After his death, Adams’ literary significance was appreciated by new critics, such as Yvor Winters and R. P. Blackmur.



Adams was a great grandson of the second president of the United States, John Adams, and a grandson of the sixth president, John Quincy Adams. He was educated at Harvard University and later in Germany. During the American Civil War he served in London as a private secretary for his father. After teaching history at Harvard and editing the North American Review, he settled in Washington D.C., researching American history (which led to The Life of Albert Gallatin and History of the United States of America), and making his house a salon of politicians and intellectuals. Works created during this period include two novels, Democracy and Esther, both of which portray the vicissitudes of ideals in contemporary America through the heroines’ adventures. Throughout his life, Adams struggled to conceptualize the major transformations of American society; this latter, he argued, was losing touch with its republican ideals as a result of capitalism’s increasing social and economic dominance. Mont-Saint-Michel and Chartres and The Education of Henry Adams, major works that address these questions, were his attempts at develoing a new theory to account for the matrix of history in which the transformations of American society occurred — from the unity of the Middle Ages to the chaos of the twentieth century — but not without an ironical gesture towards his own ignorance.



Selected List of Works:

The Life of Albert Gallatin (1879)

Democracy: An American Novel (1880) 

Esther: A Novel (1884) 

History of the United States of America during the Administrations of Thomas Jefferson and James Madison (1889–91) 

Mont-Saint-Michel and Chartres (1913) 

The Education of Henry Adams (1918) 

The Degradation of the Democratic Dogma (1919)

Further reading:



(Bush)



(Lears)



(Rowe)



	(Samuels and Samuels)	



(Harbet)



(History of the United States During the Administration of James Madison)