
Afrocubanismo
Mario Rey

Afrocubanismo was an aesthetic trend in art music during the first half of
the twentieth century that focused on the validation of African cultural
features present in Cuban society.  The movement gained expression in the
works of a seminal group of composers, whose artistic production reflected
neo-nationalistic musical concerns, emphasizing the manipulation of timbral
and rhythmic elements in a modern harmonic vocabulary.  These musical
experiments marked a significant juncture in the evolution of Cuban concert
music, forging an inclusive representation of race in the reformation of
national cultural identity.

                                     ***

Responding to a period of political turbulence and financial decline, a
group of progressive intellectuals, journalists, and members of the
artistic community committed to cultural reconstruction established the
Grupo Minorista in Havana in 1923. Well aware of Cubas ambivalent
attitudes towards its African heritage, the circle sought to explore the
roots of cubanness in order to forge a more inclusive, decolonized revision
of Cuban cultural history.

As a complement to the socio-humanistic concerns of the circle, an artistic
movement emerged called Afrocubanismo, which addressed the cultural
continuities of Cuba's African heritage. The movement embraced Afro-Cuban
themes as the focus of a distinct creole identity, and acknowledged the
various influences of African epistemology in art and folklore. Minorista
poets, visual artists, and musicians sought to produce a socially relevant
art that reaffirmed the black presence in a society that often denied its
value. They regarded the Africanization of popular culture not only as a
sociocultural reality, but as a potential source of national pride.
Consequently, the movement not only sparked a period of prolific artistic
production, but also challenged the conventional concepts of nationhood by
asserting the legitimacy of Afro-Cuban expressive culture.

The musical manifestation of Afrocubanismo found its voice in a post-
Impressionist school of nationalist composers that fundamentally generated
twin streams of musical production: the cosmopolitan approach of Minorista
members AMADEO ROLDN (1900-1939), GILBERTO VALDS (1905-1971), and
ALEJANDRO GARCA CATURLA (1906-1940); and the folkloristic nationalism of
the more popular non-Minorista members such as ERNESTO LECUONA (1895-1963),
GONZALO ROIG (1890-1970), and the bothers ELISEO GRENET (1893-1950) and
EMILO GRENET (1908-1941).  The language of Afrocubanismo articulated by
these two sets of composers contrasts in several respects.  The former is
more in keeping with the tonal Romantic idiom, and remained predominantly
within the spheres of salon music and zarzuela (Spanish-derived nationalist
operetta) such as Roigs celebrated CECILIA VALDS (1932). These composers
crafted works that were not too abstract, and gained accessibility in their
tendency to straddle between popular and art music.  In constrast, the
manipulations of Africanist elements were considerably more organic in the
rigorous compositional procedures of the Minorista composers, who sought
solutions that were unequivocally Cuban in character but more universal in
scope, yet remained rather obscure during the lifetimes.

The movement is generally recognized as commencing with the premier of
Amadeo Roldn's (1900-1939) OBERTURA SOBRE TEMAS CUBANOS in 1925, which
ushered a new stylistic period of symphonic music, with its novel
incorporation of Afro-Cuban percussion instruments. While much Afrocubanist
music drew inspiration from the social dances, such as in Garca Caturlas
celebrated TRES DANZAS CUBANAS (1928), aspects of syncretic religious
worship such as ritualistic drumming practices were also explored. The
bicultural musical concerns of these composers generated a brand of chamber
and symphonic music, ballet, and lyric theater with all the expressive
resources and modernist language of their day.

The compositional features that articulate the aesthetic ideals of
AFROCUBANISMO were expressed through all the musical components.  Composers
appropriated what they considered to be defining gestures of Africanist
expression.  Afro-Cuban drums, which had been previously relegated to an
accompanimental role in tonal music, were elevated to the symphonic level
and conferred soloistic status. Non-pitched percussion instruments  were
used, not as coloristic or rhythmic embellishment, but rather as a central
orchestral force in which all the idiomatic, sonorous  possibilities could
be fully exploited, as exemplified by Roldans RTMICA NO. 5 (1930).

Melodic materials were generally motivic (short pitch patterns)
constructions based on pentatonic (five-note) and hexatonic (six-note)
scales. The thematic materials were mostly subject to repetition and
restatement without significant linear development. In the harmonic
structures, superimposed intervals of fourths and fifths prevailed,
punctuated by occasional tone-clusters and bitonality.  Sonorous
accompanimental effects were often percussive rather than harmonic.

The most salient compositional feature of Afrocubanist works, however, was
the manipulation of the rhythmical and metrical structure, which became
critical to their definition of Afrocubanismo.   Undoubtedly, the rhythm of
vernacular idioms, particularly the son Cubas pre-eminent music genre was
the element that had the most profound impact on the musical style, but the
composers deliberately exploited many rhythmical and metrical conceptions
of unmistakable African origin. Characterizing Afrocubanismo were constant
syncopations, polyrhythms, polymeter, hemiolas, time-line references, and,
in short, any conflicting device that shifted the accents away from the
downbeat so as to disrupt the stability of the meter.

The chief historical significance of Afrocubanismo is not only that it
valorized the traditions of the African diaspora, but that it clearly
elevated the quality of symphonic writing in Cuba, marking a pivotal stage
in concert music with the development of  a modern, syncretic compositional
syntax. These achievements provided the foundation for the next stage of
development of cultivated music for subsequent generations of composers in
Cuba.



References and further reading

Le(n, A. (1991). Of the Axis and the Hinge: Nationalism, Afro-Cubanism,
and Music in Pre-Revolutionary Cuba, In Essays on Cuban Music: North
American and Cuban Perspectives, edited by P. Manuel, 267-282. Lanham, Md.:
University Press of America.

Moore, R. (1997). Nationalizing Blackness: Afrocubanismo and Artistic
Revolution in Havana, 1920-1940. Pitssburgh: University of Pittsburgh
Press.

Rey, M. (2006). The Rhythmic Component of Afrocubanismo in the Art Music of
Cuba, Black Music Research Journal 26 (2): 181-212.
