
Miguel Aguilar Ahumada
(Huara, Chile, 1931)
Nicols Masquiarn Daz


Composer, academic and musicologist. His value  in  the  Chilean  and  Latin
American  musical  panorama  lies  in  his  role  as  a   key   figure   for
understanding the development of musical institutions  in  circuits  outside
the main centers of production and divulgation of his country, as well as  a
benchmark in the singular transition to chilean  avant-garde  music  in  the
mid-twentieth  century,  particularly  as  an  outstanding  example  on  the
adoption of the twelve-tone system.

Although Aguilar received some formal instruction on the piano from the  age
of 10, he was mainly self-taught as  a  musician.  In  1954  he  joined  the
National Conservatory of Music of the University of Chile, where  he  worked
as an assistant in the library and the sound  archives.  There  he  received
lessons in composition from Domingo Santa Cruz, Jorge  Urrutia  Blondel  and
Juan Orrego Salas. He quickly became recognized as a  talented  student  and
became  a  teaching  assistant  in   music   history,   auditory   analysis,
compositional  analysis  and  harmony,   without   obtaining   an   official
appointment.

Aguilar was influenced in style by Fre Focke, the Dutch musician  who  lived
in Chile between 1947 and 1957, from  whom  he  learned  the  techniques  of
orchestration and deepened his  understanding  of  the  twelve-tone  system,
which he had already discovered through his acquaintance with  the  writings
of  Ren  Leibowitz.  Although  some  early   compositions   adopted   a   a
neoclassical style  inspired  by  Hindemith,  they  were  destroyed  by  the
author. Consequently, all of his known works  transit  between  the  serial-
dodecaphonic system,  some  free  derivations  thereof,  and  techniques  of
aleatory music. By the early 1960s, he also  incorporated  electronic  media
under the influence of his friend and colleague Jos Vicente Asuar.  Several
of his  first  known  works  were  premiered  at  festivals  and  composers
meetings, thereby earning him a reputation  on  the  national  circuit.  His
first published  articles  in  the  Revista  Musical  Chilena,  that  mostly
consisted of musical analysis, as well as musical criticism published in  El
Mercurio after he replaced the composer  Juan  Orrego  Salas  following  the
latters departure to the United States, also  contributed  to  his  growing
reputation.

In 1956 he moved to  Santiago  to  work  at  the  the  Conservatory  of  the
Corporacin Sinfnica [Symphonic Corporation] of Concepcin, the  city  that
would become his permanent home.  There  he  began  to  intensively  promote
concert music through active involvement  in  the  organization  of  musical
events. His close ties with the capital city of  Santiago  were  crucial  to
the legitimacy of the musical  events  he  was  involved  in  supporting  in
Concepcin, such as the first local performance of contemporary music,  that
featured his own composition, METAMORFOSIS SOBRE UN LIED DE MOZART (1956).

In 1963, he earned a scholarship that allowed him to study  conducting  with
Wolfgang von der Nahme at the Hchschule  of  Music  in  Cologne  (Germany),
where he also studied counterpoint with Friedrich Blume. At this  time,  the
Corporacin Sinfnica joined the University of  Concepcin  (1963),  thereby
becoming the Escuela Superior de Msica  [Higher  School  of  Music].  Thus,
when  Aguilar  returned  from  Germany  in  1965,  he  became  a  university
professor, a position that he maintained until  2000,  serving  for  several
periods as director as director of the Escuela  Superior  de  Msica,  later
named the Instituto de Arte and finally  the  Departamento  de  Msica.  His
universitary position allowed him, beginning  in  the  second  half  of  the
1960s,  to  become  a  major  proponent  of  the  musical   avant-garde   in
Concepcin. In  October  1965,  he  organized  the  first  concert  entirely
devoted to contemporary music in the city of Concepcin, causing a  reaction
comparable, in a local scale, to the notorious Skandalkonzert of the  Second
Viennese School.

His work was mainly disseminated through the Festivales  de  Msica  Chilena
[Chilean Music Festivals] that took place in Santiago until 1969. After  the
putsch in 1973, the  new  political  order  deteriorated  cultural  exchange
between Concepcin and Santiago. The festivals in the  capital  were  closed
and without a feasible venue for the promotion of contemporary music in  the
province, the possibilities of performing  these  repertoires  were  greatly
reduced. As a result, Aguilar then concentrated on academic  research  while
continuing his creative work without interruption until 2003, at which  time
his output decreased significantly.

Aguilar's music is based almost exclusively on the guidelines of the  serial
dodecaphonic language, finding its main reference  in  the  music  of  Anton
Webern. This  creates  a  tension  between  a  radical  and  a  conservative
attitude: on the one hand, his  aesthetic  orientation  displayed  a  strong
resistance to the  compositional  techniques  prescribed  by  the  hegemonic
circles of Chilean art music, that favored Post-Romantic,  Neoclassical  and
Expressionist manners. On  the  other  hand,  the  dodecaphonic  system  was
adopted by Aguilar for the possibilities of control it offered over what  is
traditionally  understood  as  both  sound  material  and  structure.   This
resulted in a musical language that was  constantly  evolving  within  well-
defined limits, and earned him the reputation of father of  Chilean  twelve-
tone music.

Aguilars catalogue contains mostly chamber works  for  various  groups  and
solo instruments, as well as some vocal and symphonic  works.  He  displayed
an abiding interest from an early stage in the piano  repertoire,  including
four four piano sonatas that revisit Scalattis sonata,  as  well  as  three
Webernian MICROSCOPAS. His OBERTURA AL TEATRO INTEGRAL (1954), inspired  by
Kafka and  composed  using  Fockes  system  of  orchestration,  is  another
important work, and along with his CONCIERTO PARA SIETE INSTRUMENTOS  (1958,
rev. 1988), remains one of his best known. From then, his production  tended
towards chamber music with various instrumental formats.  After  his  return
from Germany in 1965, he also began  to  incorporate  aspects  of  aleatoric
techniques influenced by John Cage. Another important aspect  of  his  music
is its relationship to literature, embodied in instrumental  works  inspired
by Kafka (OBERTURA AL TEATRO INTEGRAL, SONATA NO. 2 and FRAGMENTO SOBRE  EL
CASTILLO DE KAFKA),  one  based  on  texts  by  Samuel  Beckett,  and  some
settings of poems by Vicente Huidobro (TOUR EIFFEL, ARTE POTICA,  POEMA  DE
HUIDOBRO, CANCIN DE  MARCELO  CIELOMAR),  all  writers  with  whom  Aguilar
empathized owing to their ironic vein.

Aguilar received the Municipal Prize of Art in  Music  (1986),  the  Charles
Ives Award for Composers (1996), the Regional Award in Musical Arts  (2006),
and the President of the Republic Award  in  the  Classical  Music  category
(2006).



Bibliography

Claro, S.; Urrutia, J (1973) Historia  de  la  Msica  en  Chile,  Santiago:
Editorial Orbe.
Masquiarn, N. (2011) Miguel Aguilar: Obras para voz  y  piano.  Obras  para
piano solo. Concepcin: self-edition with financing of the National  Council
of Culutre and Arts.
