
AKERMAN, Chantal (June 6 1950, Brussels, Belgium - )

Chantal Akerman is a Belgian filmmaker, artist and film professor known  for
her austere, minimalistic style, her feminist themes and her  depictions  of
alienation, dislocation and repression, all  masterfully  expressed  in  her
best-known film, Jeanne Dielman 23, quai du Commerce 1080 Bruxelles (1975).

Akerman is an autodidact who abandoned film school before  the  end  of  the
first term. Her debut feature, the 1968 short Saute Ma  Ville  (Blow  Up  My
Town) displays the jump cuts,  discontinuous  editing  and  anarchic  camera
movements  typical  of  Godard  and  the  French  New  Wave.  Soon  however,
influenced  by  the  work  of  Jonas  Mekas  and  Michael  Snow,  which  she
discovered during a two-year stay in New York, her style  grew  increasingly
more abstract and sparse, favoring slow pans and lengthy shots that  isolate
her anomic protagonists.

These thematic and  stylistic  preoccupations  are  best  expressed  in  her
magnum opus, the stately Jeanne  Dielman.  At  201  minutes,  the  minimally
plotted film is a study  in  duration,  unfolding  at  a  glacial  pace  and
depicting, over three days, the steady  mental  unraveling  of  the  titular
housewife, played by the  elegant,  remote  Delphine  Seyrig  as  an  opaque
being, defined solely by her stifling routine. Akerman uses precise  framing
and static shots to establish a  sense  of  rhythm  subsequently  broken  by
subtle variations that signal Jeannes increasing distress.

References and Further reading:

Foster, Gwendolyn Audrey (2003). Identity and Memory: the Films  of  Chantal
Akerman. Carbondale : Southern Illinois University Press.
Margulies, Ivone (1996). Nothing  Happens:  Chantal  Akerman's  Hyperrealist
Everyday. Durham : Duke University Press.

Selected Filmography:

Saute Ma Ville (Blow Up My Town; 1968)
Je tu il elle (I... You... He...She., 1974
Jeanne Dielman 23, quai du Commerce 1080 Bruxelles (1975)
DEst (From the East, 1993)
La Captive (The Prisoner, 2000)
De lautre ct (From the Other Side, 2002)
Paratextual materials:

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GUStWsegZ0k - Interview  with  the  director
recorded in 2011 at the Venice Film Festival.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jx2RNzl-p3Q - Saute ma ville on YouTube

Maria Ioni
Ryerson University
