Taylor & Francis – Encyclopedia of Modernism



About you

[Salutation]

G.

[Middle name]

Betts



[Enter your biography]



[Enter the institution with which you are affiliated]



Your article

Allen, Solomon (1902-1967)

Allen, Barney

Barney Allen was the pseudonym of Solomon Allen, a Jewish-Canadian novelist from Toronto, Ontario. His writing combined influences from James Joyce and Sigmund Freud. His 1929 novel They Have Bodies was especially influenced by avant-garde experimentation. The book provoked a sensation in Toronto for its unflattering and hyper-sexualized depiction of the local moneyed class, and the local constabulary seized copies in the city. The book effectively disappeared from public attention. Subsequent titles by Allen, as a result, backed away from such literary radicalism in favour of increasingly populist prose and medical discourse. Allen remained deeply interested in both Freudian psychoanalysis, with its sexual preoccupation, and the physical body. His five novels — which all feature a gynecologist as protagonist or main character — each advance a central thesis about the importance of directly and forthrightly acknowledging the naturalness of both sexual desires and the physical body. Towards this end, he also organized a ‘couples retreat’ north of Toronto to study psychoanalysis together in a sex-positive environment.

Barney Allen (1902-1967) was the pseudonym of Solomon Allen, a Jewish-Canadian novelist from Toronto, Ontario. His writing combined influences from James Joyce and Sigmund Freud. His 1929 novel They Have Bodies was especially influenced by avant-garde experimentation. The book provoked a sensation in Toronto for its unflattering and hyper-sexualized depiction of the local moneyed class, and the local constabulary seized copies in the city. The book effectively disappeared from public attention. Subsequent titles by Allen, as a result, backed away from such literary radicalism in favour of increasingly populist prose and medical discourse. Allen remained deeply interested in both Freudian psychoanalysis, with its sexual preoccupation, and the physical body. His five novels — which all feature a gynecologist as protagonist or main character — each advance a central thesis about the importance of directly and forthrightly acknowledging the naturalness of both sexual desires and the physical body. Towards this end, he also organized a ‘couples retreat’ north of Toronto to study psychoanalysis together in a sex-positive environment.



Allen’s experimental novel, They Have Bodies: A Realistic Novel in Five Parts (1929), uses stream-of-consciousness and Brechtian theatre techniques to expose the sexual dalliances and impulses of the Canadian aristocracy. As scandal emerges from various trysts, Allen highlights the complex classist mechanisms that emerge to suppress what could not be repressed. Despite its self-conscious satire of Canadian repression, the local Metropolitan Toronto Police quickly censored the book itself.

Further reading:

[Enter citations for further reading here]