Taylor & Francis – Encyclopedia of Modernism



About you

[Salutation]

Tina

[Middle name]

Sherwell



[Enter your biography]



International Academy of Art Palestine



Your article

Anani, Nabil (1943--)

[Enter any variant forms of your headword – OPTIONAL]

Nabil Anani was born in Latrun, Palestine in 1943. He graduated in Fine Arts from Alexandra University, Egypt in 1969, going on to work as a teacher trainer at the UN training college in Ramallah while maintaining his own full time studio practice. Anani was awarded the first Palestinian National Prize for Visual Art in 1997 by former President Yasser Arafat, and was appointed head of the League of Palestinian Artists in 1998. In 2006 he was awarded The King Abdullah of Jordan Award in Fine Arts for the Middle East. He participated in numerous exhibitions of Palestinian Art around the world, and was a founding member of Al Wasiti Art Centre in Jerusalem and The International Academy of Art, Palestine in Ramallah. 

Nabil Anani was born in Latrun, Palestine in 1943. He graduated in Fine Arts from Alexandra University, Egypt in 1969, going on to work as a teacher trainer at the UN training college in Ramallah while maintaining his own full time studio practice. Anani was awarded the first Palestinian National Prize for Visual Art in 1997 by former President Yasser Arafat, and was appointed head of the League of Palestinian Artists in 1998. In 2006 he was awarded The King Abdullah of Jordan Award in Fine Arts for the Middle East. He participated in numerous exhibitions of Palestinian Art around the world, and was a founding member of Al Wasiti Art Centre in Jerusalem and The International Academy of Art, Palestine in Ramallah. 



While commissioned to undertake several public works in Palestine, including sculptures and murals, Anani is known for his paintings of the Palestinian landscape, which often focus on village life. Along with other Palestinian artists, including Sliman Mansour, Anani depicted the countryside as place untouched by the changes of occupation, creating images of longing and nostalgia for the homeland. Works from this period showcase his distinctive style of accumulative painted space with decorative detail and heavy outlines. In the late 1990s Anani moved away from works in oil and watercolours to mixed media, using natural materials including henna dyes, leather, and found materials, as well as creating sculptural works from wood and papermache as part of the New Vision art group. Throughout his career the Palestinian landscape, villages, and traditions have served as points of reference for his work.

Further reading:

 (Anani, Nabil Anani Catalogue for Solo Exhibition 'Chairs.')



(Anani and Kananeh, Palestinian Popular Costumes)



(Badr and Anani)



(Boullata)



(Mansour and Anani)