Taylor & Francis – Encyclopedia of Modernism



About you

[Salutation]

Kristen

[Middle name]

Alfaro



[Enter your biography]



New York University



Your article

Anthology Film Archives

[Enter any variant forms of your headword – OPTIONAL]

Anthology Film Archives (‘Anthology’ hereafter) is an experimental film institution that was founded in 1970 by experimental filmmakers Jonas Mekas, Jerome Hill, Peter Kubelka, Stan Brakhage, James Broughton, Ken Kelman, and film critic P. Adams Sitney. Based in the Joseph Papp Theatre in New York City, Anthology was funded primarily by Jerome Hill. According to its founders, Anthology was the first film museum dedicated to film art and, as stated in their manifesto, the institution aimed to define film study and exhibition with a film art canon (Essential Cinema) and a theatre (Invisible Cinema). In addition, Anthology created the Film Study Center, a space for archiving, preserving, and examining films and film-related journals, ephemera, and paper documents.

Anthology Film Archives (‘Anthology’ hereafter) is an experimental film institution that was founded in 1970 by experimental filmmakers Jonas Mekas, Jerome Hill, Peter Kubelka, Stan Brakhage, James Broughton, Ken Kelman, and film critic P. Adams Sitney. Based in the Joseph Papp Theatre in New York City, Anthology was funded primarily by Jerome Hill. According to its founders, Anthology was the first film museum dedicated to film art and, as stated in their manifesto, the institution aimed to define film study and exhibition with a film art canon (Essential Cinema) and a theatre (Invisible Cinema). In addition, Anthology created the Film Study Center, a space for archiving, preserving, and examining films and film-related journals, ephemera, and paper documents. 



Manifesto 

Essential Cinema

Film Study Center



The Essential Cinema canon was chosen by a Film Selection Committee composed of Anthology’s founders. The committee utilized controversial methods of selection based on their collective taste in—it was later criticized—predominantly male filmmakers. Their methods garnered the attention of critics and scholars and the canon became Anthology’s most famous endeavor. Screened in the Invisible Cinema theatre, Essential Cinema was presented in cycles and enabled the patrons to view a whole history of art cinema in one institution. 



Conceived by Peter Kubelka, the Invisible Cinema was a minimalist theatre designed for concentrated viewing. It was furnished with hooded seats that encapsulated the viewer and blocked external noise and visual distractions. Such specifications were expensive to maintain and in 1973, Anthology closed the theatre. After Jerome Hill’s death in 1972, Anthology struggled to remain open with private and public funding. After a year, the institution moved into 80 Wooster Street in SoHo, where it remained until 1978.



Included in Anthology’s original institutional goals, the Film Study Center remained a lasting endeavor that helped Anthology obtain public funding. It provided research and viewing space for students and enthusiasts, and allowed Anthology to work with local and international university film programs in order to expand and cultivate film research. 



Anthology Film Archives brought experimental, art, and independent cinema into the framework of a museological institution. Prior to 1970, experimental films were screened primarily within itinerant spaces. Experimental filmmakers such as Mekas and Brakhage created films antithetical to the aesthetic and narrative norms of popular cinema, which were difficult to exhibit in commercial theatres. As independent filmmakers continued to favour formal investigation over conventional narrative, experimental film exhibition remained peripheral to commercial theatres and modern art museums, and was largely limited to those who had access to urban screenings or film societies. Anthology placed experimental film in a broader public sphere by creating a centralized space for its exhibition and distribution.





Website for more information:



http://anthologyfilmarchives.org/about/manifesto



http://anthologyfilmarchives.org/about/essential-cinema



http://anthologyfilmarchives.org/collections/collections-landing



Further reading:

 (Alfaro)

(Bernstein and Shapiro)

(James)

(P. A. Sitney)

(S. Sitney)