Taylor & Francis – Encyclopedia of Modernism



(Tolley) (Tolley)About you

[Salutation]

Nicholas

[Middle name]

Beauchesne



[Enter your biography]



University of Alberta



Your article

Apocalypse Poets

Apocalyptics; New Apocalypse Poets; New Apocalyptics

The Apocalypse Poets (or Apocalyptics) were a network of British writers centred around the largely forgotten Apocalypse poetry movement. Apocalypse poetry, inspired by the notion of Surrealism stripped of its automatism, was a reaction to the poetic dominance of the Auden Generation during the 1930s. Aesthetically, Apocalypticism dealt in nightmarish images, engaged with mythology, and meditated on war. Politically, it tended towards anarchism. 



Poets Henry Treece (1912-1966) and J. F. Hendry (1912-1986) became acquainted with one another while contributing to the literary magazine Seven. They developed an Apocalyptic manifesto in 1938 in collaboration with Dorian Cooke (1916-2005). The following year, Treece and Hendry edited an anthology of poetry entitled The New Apocalypse (1939). They later anthologised two more collections of Apocalyptic poetry: The White Horseman (1941) and The Crown and the Sickle (1943). By the time The Crown and the Sickle saw publication, the Apocalypse movement had lost much of its momentum and, along with another short-lived movement, Personalism, was subsumed under an emerging New Romanticism.  

The Apocalypse Poets (or Apocalyptics) were a network of British writers centred around the largely forgotten Apocalypse poetry movement. Apocalypse poetry, inspired by the notion of Surrealism stripped of its automatism, was a reaction to the poetic dominance of the Auden Generation during the 1930s. Aesthetically, Apocalypticism dealt in nightmarish images, engaged with mythology, and meditated on war. Politically, it tended towards anarchism. 



Poets Henry Treece (1912-1966) and J. F. Hendry (1912-1986) became acquainted with one another while contributing to the literary magazine Seven. They developed an Apocalyptic manifesto in 1938 in collaboration with Dorian Cooke (1916-2005). The following year, Treece and Hendry edited an anthology of poetry entitled The New Apocalypse (1939). They later anthologised two more collections of Apocalyptic poetry: The White Horseman (1941) and The Crown and the Sickle (1943). By the time The Crown and the Sickle saw publication, the Apocalypse movement had lost much of its momentum and, along with another short-lived movement, Personalism, was subsumed under an emerging New Romanticism.  



Along with Treece, Hendry, and Cooke, other writers in the Apocalypse network include G. S. Fraser, Nicholas Moore, Stefan Schimanski, Norman McCaig, Philip O’Connor, Tom Scott, Vernon Watkins, and most famously, Sir Herbert Read and Dylan Thomas. Read supported the movement as a director at Routledge and Kegan Paul publishing, but was not an outspoken member; Thomas was a ‘reluctant passenger’ who quickly repudiated his association with this movement.

Further reading:

(Martin)



 (Persoon)



(Tolley)



(Hendry and Treece)



(Hendry and Treece, The White Horseman)



(Hendry and Treece, The New Apocalypse)



(Schimanski and Treece)