
Alexander Archipenko (1887 Kyiv  1964 New York)

Archipenko was the son of Paraskeva Vasylivna [nee Makhova] and Porfirii
Antonovych Archipenko. His father was a professor of engineering at the
University of Kyiv, an inventor, and a mechanical engineer. Alexander
Archipenko studied painting and sculpture at the Kyiv Art schoolSchool from
1902 until 1905, when he was expelled for criticizing its conservatism.
Outside formal schooling, he was interested in ancient art indigenous to
Ukraine  stone sculptures of females known as babas,, Scythian works,
as well as those from Neolithic Trypillian culture being excavated in the
region at the time. These would inform his work throughout his career, as
would ancient Egyptian, pre-Columbian and Byzantine art. His polychromed
sculpture, was exhibited in his first show in 1906, in a village outside
Kyiv. He moved to Moscow that same year, participated in group exhibitions,
and saw French avant-garde art first-hand, particularly, the first Zolotoe
runo sSalon in spring 1908. Later that year, he moved to Paris, and, after
two weeks at the Ecole des Beaux-Arts, decided to study independently,
from direct observation of art works at local museums. Archipenko opened a
studio and built relationships with many artists of the cubist circle,
particularly brothers Marcel Duchamp and Raymond Duchamp-Villon and Fernand
Lger. He first exhibited with them in 1910 at the Salon des Independents
XXVI, joining them regularly until their last group show in 1920. Among
numerous additional exhibits are the Armory Show in 1913, the Futurists in
1914 and solo, at Der Sturm in Berlin 1913, the Venice Biennale in 1920 and
at Socit Anonyme, New York in 1921. The latter wasis organized by Marcel
Duchamp and Katherine Dreier, an ardent promoter of modern art in the
U.SUnited States. The years from 1908 until the early 1920s are an
extremely innovative period in Archipenkos artistic production. A number
of his early works with the human figure are block-like and self-contained,
explorations of mass and shape in varying degrees of angularity. Voids of
space and, concave and convex forms are increasingly included as defining
sculptural elements, ([e.g., Woman Combing Her Hair, 1914)] and are
informed by dance, movement, and the dynamics of opposing forces, an
interest of many artists at the time. Beginning in 1914, Archipenko
produced his sculpto-paintings  constructed, brightly painted wall
reliefs,, inspired in part by collages assemblage of various textured
elements. He created near forty40, primarily focusing on women in
interiors, until 1923, only to resume them in the 1950s.
In 1920, Archipenko moved to Berlin and opened a school while, still
maintaining his Paris studio. There he married the sculptor Angelica Bruno-
Schmitz, who worked under the name Gela Forster. She was a founding member
of the Dresdner Sezession Gruppe 1919, and a significant artist of German
Expressionism. In 1921, Archipenko returneds to more naturalistic
representations, such as Feminine Solitude, 1921. He and Schmitz emigrated
to the U.S. in 1923, settling in New York. In 1927, he received a patent
for his invention Archipentura, a machine designed to produce true
motion in painting. Now lost, it consisted of two 3 x 7 boxes, into
which horizontal strips of canvas were sequentially mounted to make up an
entire image. When activated, a mechanism moved the strips, changing the
image. He continued to exhibit across the U.S. and was given a solo
exhibition at the Ukrainian Pavilion of the Chicago Century of Progress
Exposition in 1933. He taught in Los Angeles, then in Chicago at the New
Bauhaus upon the invitation of Lszl Moholy-Nagy, its director, before
returning to New York, where he began producing sculptures made of
plexiglass. During the 1950s, his works wereare featured in a number of
major exhibitions on 20th century modern art, such as LOeuvre du XXe,
Peintures, Sculptures ([Muse National dArt Moderne, Paris, Tate Gallery
as XXth Century Masterpieces)]; American Sculpture ([Metropolitan Museum
of Art, 1951)]; Sculpture of the Twentieth Century ([Philadelphia Museum
of Art, Art Institute of Chicago, Museum of Modern Art, NY, 1952)] and
receiveds national honours for his innovations in sculpture.

References and further reading:

Jaroslav Leshko, Alexander Archipenko, Vision and Continuity, exh. cat.
Ukrainian Museum, NY. 2005.

Katherine Jansky Michaelsen, and Nehama Guralnik. Alexander Archipenko, A
Centennial Tribute Washington DC., National Gallery of Art, 1986.

Vita Susak, Ukrainian Artists in Paris 1910-1939. Kyiv: Rodovid, 2010.

