

Art Informel

The French term informel was used in 1951, by the critic Michel Tapi, in
order to describe a new trend in postwar abstract art that had been put on
display at two exhibitions in Paris that year. The first, held in March at
Galerie Nina Dausset, brought together works by artists such as Hans
Hartung, Jean-Paul Riopelle, Georges Mathieu, Camille Bryen, Jackson
Pollock, Willem de Kooning, and Wols under the theme of extreme tendencies
in non-figurative painting. In his preface to the catalogue of this
exhibition, Tapi connected the informel, or unformed, with the raw
material anarchy of the real. The second exhibition, entitled Signs of the
Unformed, was organized by Tapi in November at Studio Fracchetti and
included works by Jean Fautrier, Henri Michaux, Jean Dubuffet, Iaroslav
Serpan, Jean-Paul Riopelle, and Georges Mathieu. The concept of the
informel was theorised at length the following year in Tapis book Un Art
Autre, which is usually but not unproblematically translated as Art of
Another Kind. In this book, Tapi argued that art is other to the extent
that it opens itself up to the unformed real in a way that radically breaks
with the trajectory of modernist abstraction in terms of motivation,
technique, and style.

Resonating with the somber mood of the postwar periodunder the conditions
of which, according to Theodore Adorno, it was increasingly difficult to
create works of artTapi wrote that the artist must now face the abyss of
the real in an almost mystical pursuit. Invoking both Friedrich Nietzsche
and St. John of the Cross, Tapi argued that the postwar artist must create
not beautiful or pleasurable objects, but must first of all plunge the
depths of himself and of the world without the aid of any philosophical or
religious supports. That is, borrowing from the title of the March 1951
exhibition, the informel artist must confront vehemence. Tapis view of
the postwar artist had many similarities to Jean-Paul Sartres writings on
art and existentialism, which were published just a few years earlier,
particularly in Tapis suggestion that there were no aesthetic values that
could be determined a priori. Rather, such values, if any, could only arise
in the act of creating a work. Tapi strongly preferred the term art
autre over art informel since, for him, the unformed referred primarily
to the anarchic depth of the real rather than the abstract workings on a
canvas. He even claimed that art informel was an absurd formulation and
that there could never be, properly speaking, an art informel. Both terms
remained inadequately defined, both aesthetically and stylistically, and
thus there was a lot of ambiguity surrounding them. Even by the time Jean
Paulhan published his book LArt Informel in 1962, art autre and art
informel became largely indistinguishable. Art informel, being more
linguistically flexible, ultimately became the preferred term in the
literature. It is worth nothing that many of the artists associated with
either of these terms, including Fautrier, Michaux, and Dubuffet, found
both of themalong with Tapis desire to herd together such deeply
individualistic and diverse artistshighly deplorable.

Despite Tapis own particular differentiation between the appellations art
autre and art informel, and despite their subsequent conflation by some,
the terms have also come to loosely describe two overlapping aspects of
postwar European art. Other critics have used the name art informel as a
subset of art autre, which in this sense is a broader term that includes
both figurative artworks, for example those of Dubuffet, and abstract or
calligraphic ones, like that of Mathieu and Michaux. Making matters even
more convoluted, this abstract tendency has been referred to not only as
art informel, but also as tachism and lyrical abstraction. Here art
informel should be understood not as radically formless but rather as
expressing a gestural, spontaneous, and anti-geometrical type of
abstraction that conveys a coming-to form. In this sense, it has been
uncritically described as the weak European counterpart of abstract
expressionism, albeit on a more intimate scale by comparison even though it
is widely acknowledged that the two groups of artists seem to have
developed more or less independently out of surrealist automatism. The
comparison is partly justified since Mathieus delicately gestural works
were often performed before an audience by squeezing or dripping paint
directly from the tube, and since Fautriers heavily impastoed and more
somber works were often produced flat on the floor.

Ultimately, whether we talk about art autre or art informel, the thing that
vaguely unites the artists Tapi brought together in 1951 is a postwar
existential angst and disgust, which manifests itself stylistically in the
vehement refusal to engage with beautiful forms. Instead, half-formed
images appear in their very emergence within a web of gestures or within a
thick accumulation of matter as if capturing the moment of the artists
encounter with what Tapi called the abyss of the real and the space of
the canvas. Art informel, while not a coherent movement, is significant
because it undercuts the normative and unidirectional view of art history
that transports us directly from Paris to New York following the Second
World War. From 1960, for example, Tapi helped to foster art informel, as
well as its associated groups such as spatialism and nuclearism, in Italy
by co-founding the International Centre of Aesthetic Research in Turin.
Tapi also had a significant impact upon the development of the Gutai
artists in Japan after visiting the country in 1957 and 1958 in order to
disseminate his ideas concerning art autre and art informel. The Gutai
artists would, in turn, have an effect on other important contemporary
tendencies like Fluxus and Happenings.

                                                                 Jay Hetrick


References and further reading

Carter, Curtis and Karen Butler, eds., Jean Fautrier (New Haven: Yale
University Press, 2002)

Haftmann, Werner, ed., Wols (New York: Harry Abrams, 1965)

Marter, Joan, ed., Abstract Expressionism: The International Context (New
Brunswick: Rutgers University Press, 2007)

Morris, Frances, ed., Paris Post War: Art and Existentialism 1945-55
(London: Tate, 1994)

Schimmel, Paul, ed., Destroy the Picture: Painting the Void, 1949-1962 (New
York: Skira Rizzoli, 2012)

Tapi, Michel, A New Beyond in Herschel Chipp, ed., Theories of Modern
Art (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1968), pp. 603-605

Tapi, Michel, The Significant Message of Georges Mathieu (New York: Stable
Gallery, 1952)


Suggested images

Wols, Bird, 1949, oil on canvas, 92 x 64 cm
Menil Collection, Houston










Jean Fautrier, Head of a Hostage no. 14, 1944, mixed media on paper, 35 x
27 cm
Museum of Contemporary Art, Los Angeles











Georges Mathieu, Painting, 1952, oil on canvas, 200 x 300 cm
Solomon Guggenheim Museum, New York


