

Art Informel

The French term informel was used by the critic Michel Tapi in order to
describe a new trend in postwar abstract art displayed at two Paris
exhibitions in 1951. The first exhibition, held in March at Galerie Nina
Dausset, brought together works by artists such as Hans Hartung, Jean-Paul
Riopelle, Georges Mathieu, Camille Bryen, Jackson Pollock, Willem de
Kooning, and Wols under the theme of extreme tendencies in non-figurative
painting. In his preface to the catalogue of this exhibition, Tapi
connected the informel, or unformed, with the raw material anarchy of the
real. The second exhibition, entitled Signs of the Unformed, was
organized by Tapi in November at Studio Fracchetti, and included works by
Jean Fautrier, Henri Michaux, Jean Dubuffet, Iaroslav Serpan, Jean-Paul
Riopelle, and Georges Mathieu. The concept of the informel was theorised at
length the following year in Tapis book Un art autre (usually but not
unproblematically translated as Art of Another Kind). In this book, Tapi
argued that art is other to the extent that it opens itself up to the
unformed real in a way that radically breaks with the trajectory of
modernist abstraction in terms of motivation, technique, and style.

Resonating with the somber mood of the postwar period  in which, according
to Theodore Adornos famous assertion, it was increasingly difficult to
create works of art  Tapi wrote that the artist must now face the abyss
of the real in an almost mystical pursuit. Invoking both Friedrich
Nietzsche and St. John of the Cross, Tapi argued that the postwar artist
must create not beautiful or pleasurable objects, but must first of all
plunge the depths of the self and of the world without the aid of any
philosophical or religious supports. That is, borrowing the title of the
March 1951 exhibition, the informel artist must confront vehemence.
Tapis view of the postwar artist paralleled Jean-Paul Sartres writings
on art and existentialism a few years earlier (in which, incidentally,
Sartre praised Wols as being the existentialist artist par excellence):
both believed there were no aesthetic values that could be determined a
priori. Rather, such values, if any, could only arise in the act of
creating a work. Tapi strongly preferred the term art autre over Art
Informel, since, for him, the unformed referred primarily to the anarchic
depths of the real rather than the abstract workings on a canvas. He even
claimed that art informel was an absurd formulation and that there could
never be, properly speaking, an Art Informel. Because neither term was
rigorously defined, aesthetically or stylistically, and thus remained
somewhat ambiguous (even by the time Jean Paulhan published his book LArt
Informel in 1962) art autre and Art Informel became largely
indistinguishable and the later, being more linguistically flexible,
ultimately became the preferred term in the literature. It is notable that
many of the artists associated with either of these terms, including
Fautrier, Michaux, and Dubuffet, found both of them  along with Tapis
desire to herd together such deeply individualistic and diverse artists 
highly deplorable.

Despite Tapis own particular differentiation between the appellations art
autre and Art Informel, and despite their subsequent conflation by some,
the terms have also come to loosely describe two overlapping aspects of
postwar European art. Other critics have used the name Art Informel as a
subset of art autre, which in this sense is a broader term that includes
both figurative artworks, for example that of Dubuffet, and abstract or
calligraphic ones, like that of Mathieu and Michaux. Making matters even
more convoluted, this abstract tendency has been referred to not only as
Art Informel, but also as Tachism(e) and lyrical abstraction. Here Art
Informel should be understood not as radically formless but rather as
expressing a gestural, spontaneous, and anti-geometrical type of
abstraction that conveys a coming-to-form. In this sense, it has been
uncritically described as the weak European counterpart of abstract
expressionism (albeit on a more intimate scale by comparison) even though
it is widely acknowledged that the two groups of artists seem to have
developed more or less independently out of surrealist automatism. However,
this comparison is partly justified, since Mathieus delicately gestural
works were often performed before an audience by squeezing or dripping
paint directly from the tube, and since Fautriers heavily impastoed and
much more somber works were often produced flat on the floor.

Ultimately, in talking about either art autre or Art Informel, the thing
that loosely unites the artists Tapi brought together in 1951 is a postwar
existential angst and disgust, which manifests itself stylistically in the
vehement refusal to engage with beautiful forms. Instead, half-formed
images appear in their very emergence within a web of gestures or within a
thick accumulation of matter as if capturing the moment of the artists
encounter with both the abyss of the real (as Tapi called it) and the
space of the canvas. Art Informel, while not a coherent movement, is
significant because it disallows the normative and unidirectional view of
art history that transports us directly from Paris to New York following
the Second World War. From 1960, for example, Tapi helped to foster Art
Informel  as well as associated groups such as spatialism and nuclearism 
in Italy by co-founding the International Centre of Aesthetic Research in
Turin. Tapi also had a significant impact upon the development of the
Gutai artists in Japan (who would, in turn, affect other important
contemporary tendencies like Fluxus and Happenings) by visiting there in
1957 and 1958 in order to disseminate his ideas concerning art autre and
art informel.

                                                                 Jay Hetrick


References and further reading

Carter, Curtis and Karen Butler, eds., Jean Fautrier (New Haven: Yale
University Press, 2002)

Haftmann, Werner, ed., Wols (New York: Harry Abrams, 1965)

Marter, Joan, ed., Abstract Expressionism: The International Context (New
Brunswick: Rutgers University Press, 2007)

Morris, Frances, ed., Paris Post War: Art and Existentialism 1945-55
(London: Tate, 1994)

Schimmel, Paul, ed., Destroy the Picture: Painting the Void, 1949-1962 (New
York: Skira Rizzoli, 2012)

Tapi, Michel, A New Beyond in Herschel Chipp, ed., Theories of Modern
Art (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1968), pp. 603-605

Tapi, Michel, The Significant Message of Georges Mathieu (New York: Stable
Gallery, 1952)


Suggested images

Wols, Bird, 1949, oil on canvas, 92 x 64 cm. Menil Collection, Houston










Jean Fautrier, Head of a Hostage no. 14, 1944, mixed media on paper, 35 x
27 cm. Museum of Contemporary Art, Los Angeles











Georges Mathieu, Painting, 1952, oil on canvas, 200 x 300 cm. Solomon
Guggenheim Museum, New York


