
ARTAUD, ANTONIN (1896-1948)

Antonin Artaud was a French writer and theatre-maker of the early twentieth
century. His work includes manifestos, correspondence, poetry, criticism,
drama, film acting, and theatre directing. His impassioned writing combines
impulses of historical avant-garde movements and the apocalyptic atmosphere
of the interwar era. His legacy in the world of arts and letters is that of
a visionary: his creative output, largely unedited, is scattered across
genres but unified by a set of themes, obsessions, and impulses, such as
the split between real life and social life and the need for violence to
regenerate civilization.

Born in Marseilles in 1896, Artaud spent much of World War I in a
sanatorium, where he developed a life-long addiction to opiates. He moved
to Paris in 1923, working in theatre there for the next thirteen years with
major experimental directors including Georges Pitoff and Charles Dullin
and acting in films directed by Carl Dreyer, Abel Gance, and Fritz Lang.

Suffering setbacks in his financial and artistic life, he travelled to
Mexico in 1936 to participate in the peyote rituals of the Tarahumara
Indians. His mental health, never strong, deteriorated quickly around this
time. He spent from 1937 to 1946 in asylums. When he was transferred to a
clinic near Paris in 1946, he was greeted with enthusiasm by artists who
had read his work while he was confined.

Artaud's early prose, poetry, and theatrical writings (1925-27) staged a
revolt against traditional forms of expression, articulating an obsession
with the rift between thought and language. He was briefly affiliated with
the Surrealists, who were also exploring alternatives to rational, language-
based expression. Artaud ran the Thtre Alfred Jarry with Roger Vitrac and
Robert Aron from 1927 to 1929, and he directed and acted in his own
adaptation of The Cenci in 1935.

Artaud's most influential work, The Theater and Its Double (1938),
articulates his disgust with theatrical standards and Western civilization
and calls for a new theatrical language halfway between gesture and
thought (Selected Writings, 242).  He argues that society must be
reconnected with its lost spirit through an overwhelming crisis like the
plague. What he called the Theater of Cruelty would play this role,
surrounding the spectator, assaulting the senses, and circumventing
rational thought and language in order to touch that fragile, fluctuating
center (Theater and Its Double, 13 that he saw as the essence of life.

Artaud spent the World War II years in various asylums, during which time
he was initially catatonic, then gradually recovered enough to draw and
write again. These asylum writings include text-on-ink portraits, letters
containing spells and curses, and postcards to public figures, including
Hitler. In 1947, he returned to dramatic writing with To Have Done With the
Judgement of God, a radio play composed of invented language, percussion,
and poetry.

Artaud's influence permeated experimental theatre of the 1960s. Theatre
artists including Jean Genet, Jean-Louis Barrault, Judith Malina, Julian
Beck, and Peter Brook testify to his influence in moving theatre away from
its foundations in playwriting and toward an emphasis on directors, image,
sound, and movement.

List of Works

Artaud, Antonin. (c. 1956-1994) Oeuvres compltes dAntonin Artaud,
nouvelle dition revue et augmente, vols. I-XXVI, Paris: Gallimard.

----- (1968-73) Collected Works of Antonin Artaud, vols. 1-4, trans. Victor
Corti, London: Calder and Boyars.

----- (1976) Selected Writings, trans. Helen Weaver, ed. and intro. Susan
Sontag, New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux.

----- (1958) The Theater and Its Double, trans. Mary Caroline Richards, New
York: Grove Weidenfeld.

References and Further Reading

Blanchot, Maurice. (1956) Artaud, La Nouvelle revue franaise 4.47
(November): 873-81.

Derrida, Jacques. (1978) The Theater of Cruelty and the Closure of
Representation and La
Parole souffle, Writing and Difference, trans. Alan Bass, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.

Finter, Helga. (1997) Antonin Artaud and the Impossible Theatre: The
Legacy of the Theatre of Cruelty, TDR 41.4 (Winter): 15-41.

Jannarone, Kimberly. (2011) Artaud and His Doubles, Ann Arbor: University
of Michigan Press.

Penot-Lacassagne, Olivier. (2005) Artaud et les avant-gardes thtrales,
Paris: Lettres Modernes Minard.

Plunka, Gene A., ed. (1994) Antonin Artaud and the Modern Theater,
Cranbury, NJ: Associated University Presses.

Virmaux, Alain. (1970) Antonin Artaud et le thtre. Paris: Seghers.

Kimberly Jannarone, University of California, Santa Cruz


Recommended Illustrations
[Note: Please use one of the images of Artaud as a younger man (preferably
the photo by Man Ray) , plus the image of him as an older man, to show the
rapid change in his appearance in a short period of time.]

[pic]
Antonin Artaud in a photo by Man Ray, 1926.
[Available at: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Artaud_manray.jpg]
and http://www.manray-photo.com/catalog_gp/popup_image.php?pID=619&image=0
]


[pic]
Antonin Artaud in the film The Passion of Joan of Arc (1928), directed by
Carl Dreyer.
[This is the image used for the cover of Artaud: Collected Works,
edited by Susan Sontag. It is available at:
http://www.eltonyoga.com/vajrayogini/wp-
content/uploads/2012/06/Artaud_thought_image.jpg]






[pic]
Artaud near the end of his life, at an asylum in Ivry.
[A series of this and similar photos are published at the end of the
Grove Press edition of The Theater and Its Double. It is available at:
https://rosamondpress.files.wordpress.com/2012/05/antonin-artaud.jpg]
