
Atget, Jean Eugne Auguste (1857-1927)

Eugne Atget employed one of the defining instruments of modernity -, the
camera -, to produce a comprehensive photographic record of what modern
city planning was about to destroy: Old Paris. Between 1897 and 1927 he
made approximately 10,000 glass negatives from which he printed an
estimated 25,000 albumen prints showing Paris and its environs in its many
architectural and social appearances. Next to palaces and parks he captured
the capitals back alleys and shanty towns. He also took a keen interest in
the citys people and portrayed its salesmen and traders as well as its rag-
and-bone men and prostitutes. Atgets achievement was, at a time when a
large part of pre-Revolutionary Paris had already been lost to the plans of
Georges-Eugne Haussmann, to systematically document what was still left.
But rather than just describe what he saw, he used, especially in his later
work, various techniques, such as asymmetric framing and the juxtaposition
of light and shadow, to imbue his compositions with a mood:   a sense of
magic in the case of his Versailles prints, a sense of loss in the case of
many of his Paris prints. While the Bibliothque Historique de la Ville de
Paris and the Muse Carnavalet, the history museum of the City of Paris,
had already bought some of Atgets photographs in 1898, it was only in the
1920s that the Paris-based American photographer Man Ray and his assistant
Berenice Abbott, a talented photographer in her own right, recognized his
true artistic genius and coined the autodidact the father of modern
photography.

Born the son of a carriage builder in Libourne, a market town in South West
France, in 1857, Atget was orphaned at the age of five and raised by his
maternal grandparents in Bordeaux. After a brief stint in the merchant
navy, he settled in Paris in 1878 to pursue a career in acting. Admitted to
the Conservatoire National de Musique et de Dclamation, his ambitions,
however, were cut short by military service obligations. Still, he remained
in Paris and, in 1882, joined a group of travelling players with whom he
performed in the citys outskirts and in the provinces. It was at this time
also that Atget met the actress Valentine Delafosse-Compagnon, who was to
become his lifelong companion. In 1887, he gave up acting, supposedly due
to a laryngeal complaint, and moved to the provinces. He tried, without
success, his hand at painting, without success, and turned to photography.
His first photographs, of Amiens and Beauvais, date from 1888. Two years
later, in 1890, Atget returned to Paris and set up as a professional
photographer specializing in documents for artists, in other words
photographs, often of flora or rural scenes, that would inform the work of
painters, sculptors and set designers. From 1897, coinciding with fierce
debates about the modernization of Paris and the construction of the Mtro,
in particular, Atget increasingly focussed on Old Paris. It was by no means
a light task, but meant lugging a heavy 18 x 24 cm view camera with glass-
plate negatives and a wooden tripod around the capital. Indeed, it is
estimated that Atgets equipment weighed no less than 15 kg.

Atget generally worked on several series, classified by theme rather than
date or place, at any one time. Some of these, such as the systematic
photographic record of old buildings in Paris, were commissioned by the
Bibliothque Historique de la Ville de Paris. Others, such as the famous
series LArt dans le Vieux Paris (The Art of Old Paris), compiled
between 1901 and 1907, were of his own making. One of the themes explored
in the latter series was the staircases of important townhouses in Paris. A
particularly fine example is Escalier. Htel du Marquis de Lagrange, 6 rue
de Braque, Paris from 1901. Sold by Atget to the cole des Beaux-Arts, it
is a rare signed photograph.

Later in his career, having almost given up photography during World War I,
Atget focussed on shop window displays. His Magasin. Avenue des Gobelins,
Paris from 1926 impresses with its many reflections, an effect that seems
to animate the mannequins and integrate them into the street. It was this
kind of transgression that appealed to the Surrealists and encouraged Man
Ray to print four of Atgets photographs in the journal La Rvolution
Surraliste in 1926. In the same year Delafosse-Compagnon died and set an
end to Atgets creative life; the following year, after a short illness,
after Atget died, following a short illness.

Atgets recognition as an artist is largely due to Berenice Abbott who
first met the photographer at the suggestion of Man Ray in 1925. She
actively sought to interest other artists in Atgets work and, following
his death in 1927, acquired 1,300 of his glass negatives and 5,000 of his
prints, now in the Museum of Modern Art in New York. With Atgets work not
having been exhibited during his lifetime, she showed several of his
photographs in exhibitions in 1928 and 1929 and also published The World of
Atget in 1964.


References and further reading:

Adam, H. C. (ed.) with an essay by A. Krase (2001), Eugene Atget's Paris,
Cologne & London: Taschen.

Aubenas, S. and G. Le Gall (eds.) (2007), Atget: Une Rtrospective, Paris:
Bibliothque nationale de France (exh. cat.). See also
http://expositions.bnf.fr/atget/infos/01.htm.

Barberie, P. with an essay on the photographic materials by B. A. Price and
K. Sutherland (2005), Looking at Atget, Philadelphia: Philadelphia Museum
of Art in association with Yale University Press (exh. cat.).

Nesbit, M. (1993) Atgets Seven Albums, New Haven: Yale University Press

Reynaud, F. and J.-B. Woloch (eds.) (2012), Eugne Atget - Paris, Paris:
Muse Carnavalet (exh. cat.). See also
http://www.carnavalet.paris.fr/fr/expositions/eugene-atget-paris.

Szarkowski, J. and M. Morris Hambourg (1981-1985), The Work of Atget, 4
vols., New York: Museum of Modern Art.

&

http://www.nga.gov/feature/atget/sources.shtm - as published by the
National Gallery of Art in Washington in 2014


Image suggestions:

[pic]

Eugne Atget, Escalier. Htel du Marquis de Lagrange, 6 rue de Braque,
Paris, 1901. Albumen silver print from glass negative, 21.9 x 17.3 cm.
Institut national dhistoire dart, Paris.

[pic]

Eugne Atget, Magasin. Avenue des Gobelins, Paris, 1926. Albumen silver
print from glass negative, 21.9 x 17.3 cm. Metropolitan Museum of Art, New
York.
