
Atonality

Arnold Whittall

Atonality: literally, the complete absence of tonality in a musical
composition.

In music, it is often claimed that modernism stands in opposition to
classicism or romanticism, and does so even though  as has also frequently
been argued  the development of music from the later BEETHOVEN (1820s) to
early SCHOENBERG (1900s) sees elements of modernist disjunction emerging
from, interacting with, and sometimes conflicting with the more organically
integrated elements of classicism and romanticism.  By the same token,
atonality  the absence of key  would clearly stand in opposition to
tonality  the presence of key, even if music from the later Beethoven to
early Schoenberg involved the increasing enrichment of diatonic tonality
with chromatic elements that, particularly from LISZT and WAGNER onwards,
tended to undermine as much or even more than to reinforce the structural
stability of diatonic fundamentals.

      Music theorists since SCHOENBERG have been divided over the validity
of atonality as a meaningful concept.  SCHOENBERG himself rejected the
term on the grounds of its negative connotations, and his own music
demonstrates how difficult it is in practice to make hard and fast
distinctions between compositions in which no suggestion of tonal
formations of any kind can be distinguished and those which demonstrate the
kind of passing allusions that SCHOENBERG sought to identify with such
terms as suspended tonality and pantonality.

      Theorists who use atonality tend to do so either because it is a
conveniently pithy term whose definition can involve constructive critique,
or because their understanding of tonality is based on the rigorously
diatonic concepts of HEINRICH Svchenker; from that perspective it certainly
makes sense to define all compositions that cannot be shown to conform to
Schenkerian principles as atonal.  There has nevertheless been considerable
support for attempting to distinguish between unambiguously atonal
compositions, such as the third of STOCKHAUSENs KLAVIERSTCKE (1952), and
works like SCHOENBERGs STRING QUARTET NO. 4 (1936) which, as Richard Kurth
and others have argued, use twelve-tone technique in ways which fit well
with what seems to have been Schoenbergs own understanding of suspended
tonality or pantonality.  The way in which Schoenbergs first movement ends
with a cadence involving elements of D minor and B flat major triads
certainly cannot be matched by anything in the STOCKHAUSEN piano piece.
Whether or not a systematic analytical method can ever be devised for
definitively proving the presence of such post-tonal elements, it seems
that the use of essentially hierarchical modes of thought by many leading
modernist composers in the years since 1960 lends support to the view that
atonality, while not impossible, is not simply to be equated with the
absence of the kind of tonal structures that predominated in music before
the twentieth century.



Further reading

Perle, George, Serial Composition and Atonality (Berkeley, Los Angeles and
London, 1962, 4/1977).   A pioneering analytical study of differences and
similarities between free atonality and twelve-tone composition.

Forte, Allen, The Structure of Atonal Music (New Haven, 1973).  The first
book-length formulation of a systematic technical basis for the analysis of
atonal (as distinct from twelve-tone) pitch formations.

Straus, Joseph N., Introduction to Post-Tonal Theory (Englewood Cliffs, NJ,
1990, 3/2005).  Outlines a comprehensive course of study exploring the post-
tonal music of Schoenberg, Berg, Webern, Bartk and Stravinsky.

Kurth, Richard, Suspended Tonalities in Schoenbergs Twelve-Tone
Compositions, Journal of the Arnold Schoenberg Center, 3 (2001).  A
concise exposition of the issues involved in Schoenbergs rejection of the
term atonality, and his concepts of suspended tonality, or pantonality.

Roig-Francol, Miguel A., Understanding Post-Tonal Music (New York, 2008).
Like Straus 1990/2005, this is essentially a text-book.  It includes a wide
range of analytical summaries, ranging from Debussy and Stravinsky to Ads
and Saariaho.

Schuijer, Michiel, Analyzing Atonal Music (Rochester NY, 2008).  As its
subtitle indicates, this is an extended critical and historical study of
the literature relating to pitch-class set theory and its contexts.





