
Automatism

Both Dada and Surrealist writers and artists experimented with automatic
creative production.  Dadaists including Francis Picabia, Tristan Tzara,
Hans Arp and Kurt Schwitters wrote automatic poems from 1918, so called
because they were transcribed without delay, serious consideration or
revision.  Dada visual artists, including Arp, Sophie Tauber and Marcel
Duchamp also relinquished creative control of their works by employing
chance.  At the same time a group of writers in France around Andr Breton
experimented with automatic writing as a new method of exploring the
unconscious.  In 1919 Breton and Philippe Soupault published Les Champs
Magntiques, the result of their first experiments with automatic writing
which tried to tap new poetic imagery through uncontrolled outbursts of
imagination. In the period 1922  24 dream accounts were added to
automatism.  In the First Manifesto of Surrealism (1924) the movement is
defined by Breton as pure psychic automatism by which it is intended to
express, either verbally or in writing, the true function of thought.
Surrealist visual artists also explored automatism.  Surrealist automatism
was influential in the development of modernist visual art.  Robert Mattas
(1911  2002) concerns with psychological states in the late 1930s set a
precedent for American abstraction.  CoBrA (1948  51), an avant-garde
collective established in Europe, favoured automatic techniques and
influenced developments in European abstraction.

Dada writers and artists sought spontaneity and freedom and often produced
works according to the laws of chance.  It has been argued that the
Surrealists also made good use of chance but simply theorised it in
psychoanalytical terms.[1]  Breton worked as a doctor treating shell-shock
victims in 1916 and had developed an interest in psychiatry, particularly
the work of Pierre Janet (1859  1947). Under the influence of Janets
concept of automatism, a condition in which an activity is carried out
without conscious knowledge by the subject, he used automatic writing as a
therapeutic tool.  Breton was also familiar with the work of Sigmund Freud
(1856  1939) and his idea of the dream as a product of the unconscious
mind influenced the experiments conducted during the sleep period between
the collapse of Paris Dada in 1922 and the founding of French Surrealism in
1924.  Throughout the 1920s automatism in relation to visual art was much
discussed.  Breton believed in automatism and encouraged artists to explore
it.  Andr Masson experimented with doodles, Salvador Dali, Yves Tanguy,
Rene Magritte and Paul Delvaux produced images that originated in dreams
and Dalis invented his paranoiac-critical method.  Joan Mir relied on
chance, spilling colour on his blank canvas to begin a composition in a
gestural fashion.  Max Ernst developed two processes, frottage (rubbing
over a textured surface such as a wood floor to produce patterns that may
suffice or may be refined) and grattage (scraping away paint to reveal
colours and textures).  Oscar Dominguez invented the process of
decalcomania (applying paint to paper that is then folded or pressed
against another sheet to reveal a pattern).  These are provocations for
images and this idea is related to Leonardo da Vincis notion of staring at
a stain on a wall and seeing battles, clouds and forests.[2]  In 1933
Breton acknowledged that in painting automatism would combine with
premeditated intentions.[3]  Max Ernsts The Kiss (1927) is a good example
of how automatism evolved to include both chance and careful consideration.



Reference:

See http://www.guggenheim.org/new-york/collections/collection-online/show-
full/piece/?search=Max%20Ernst&page=1&f=People&cr=4 for a concise analysis
of this painting in relation to automatism.



Bibliography:

Aragon, L. [1924] (2006) Une vague de rves, Paris: Seghers

Aragon, L. (1924) A Wave of Dream, translated by Susan de Muth with an
introduction by Dawn Ades, Papers of Surrealism, no. 1, 2003, available to
read online at
http://www.surrealismcentre.ac.uk/papersofsurrealism/journal1/acrobat_files/
deMuth.pdf

Breton, A. (1965) First Manifesto of Surrealism (1924) in Manifestoes of
Surrealism, Ann Arbour: Univeristy of Michigan Press

Breton, A. [1924] (1996) The Lost Steps, Lincoln: University of Nebraska
Press.  Also available in French as Les Pas Perdu, Paris: Gallimard, 1990

Cardinal, R. (2000) Andr Breton and the automatic message in Fotiade, R.
(ed) Andr Breton: the power of language, Bristol: Intellect Books



[pic]




-----------------------
[1] See Hopkins, D. (2004) Dada and Surrealism: a very short introduction,
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 69.

[2] See extract from Leonardo da Vincis Treatise on painting (1651) at
http://www.mirabilissimeinvenzioni.com/ing_treatiseonpainting_ing.html

[3] Breton, A. (1965) Surrealism and Painting, London: Macdonald, 70



