
Ballets Russes

Founded by the Russian impressario Sergei Diaghilev in 1909, the Ballets
Russes played a role of fundamental importance in the development of early
20th-century modernism. In the course of its twenty year history, Diaghilev
employed the most exciting and forward thinking artists, composers and
choregraphers of the time to create over 100 ballets which not only
revolutionized the language of dance and reformulated the role of the
performing arts by bring modernism onto the stage but also charted a new
step forward in inter-disciplinary creation, using the medium of ballet to
bring to fruition Richard Wagners concept of  the Gesamtkunstwerk (total
art work). Despite the emergence of rival enterprises in the 1920s, such
as Rolf de Mars Ballets Sudois, the Ballets Russes remained the pre-
eminent exponent of stage modernism until Diaghilevs death in Venice in
1929, when the company broke up. Subsequently, in the early 1930s, the
company was, to some extent, reassembled under the aegis of Colonel de
Basil but the productions of this period never completely matched the
artistic innovation achieved by Diaghilev and his collaborators in former
years.

Sergei Diaghilev (1872-1929) was not himself an artist, choreographer, or
composer but rather an intellectual who had a gift for identifying and
promoting the very latest artistic talent wherever and in whatever form he
found it. He came to the world of ballet with an established reputation as
one of the leading members of the St. Petersburg intelligentsia. In 1898 he
had been the leader of Mir iskusstva (The World of Art), a group of young
intellectuals comprising artists, writers and philosophers. For six year he
had published the journal of the group and had organised exhibitions of its
artist members. In 1906 he curated an enormous exhibition of Russian art in
the context of the Salon dAutomne in Paris and in 1907 and 1908 tried his
hand at staging Russian opera season in the French capital. A year later he
founded the Ballets Russes with the aim of promoting Russian art and
culture abroad, hence the Ballets Russes never performed in Russia but only
in Western Europe and the Americas (De Basils Ballets Russes toured to
Australia). Central to Diaghilevs aesthetic ideology was the idea of using
the ballet as a serious means of artistic expression and of fusing the arts
to create a Gesamtkunstwerk. For this reason, he demanded the closest
cooperation between his collaborators, with himself as final arbiter, in
order to achieve the most powerful, multi-sensory expression of the idea
that lay behind each ballet. The success of his enterprise was immediate.
The Ballets Russes charmed its audiences from the start but also, on
occasion, scandalized them with its novelty (the riot that took place on
the first night of Le sacre du printemps in 1913).

The development of the Ballets Russes may be divided into three distinct
phases. In the early period from 1909-13, Diaghilev worked almost entirely
with Russian collaborators: Mikhail Fokine and Vaslav Nijinsky were
employed as the choreographers; old friends from the Mir iskusstva group,
such as Lev Bakst, Alexandre Benois, Alexander Golovin and Nikolai Riurikh
(Roerich), were commissioned as designers and, other than the use of Claude
Debussys score for Laprs-midi dun faune and Ravels Daphnis et Chloe,
the ballets were set to existing musical texts by Russian composers such as
Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov, Alexander Borodin and Petr Tchaikovsky. In 1910,
however, Diaghilev began to work closely with Igor Stravinsky, who became
the house composer and introduced a new strain of musical modernism into
the Ballets Russes with his Loiseau de feu. This period marked a
transition from classical ballets familiar to the audience, such as Les
Sylphides (1909) andLac des Cygnes (1911), to sumptuous new creations,
such as Schhrezade (1910) and Laprs-midi dun faune (1911), both
designed by Bakst. These ballets gave way to more exploratory work, such as
Le sacre du printemps (1913), which shocked the audience through the
primitive modernism of Stravinskys score and the revolutionary
choreography designed by Nijinsky.

In 1913, however, Diaghilev undertook a significant change in direction
when he employed Natalia Goncharova, a Russian modernist painter, to make
the designs for his producion of Le coq dor (1914). Her novel and brightly
coloured designs, executed in the style of NEO-PRIMITIVISM, excited the
French audience and convinced Diaghilev that he should now priviledge the
work of modernist painters. During the war years both Fokine and Nijinsky
were lost to the company and a new choreographer, Leonid Massine, was
appointed. Massine worked closely with the artistic avant-garde whom
Diaghilev now increasingly employed, so much so that the independence of
the choreography was threatened by the novelty of the staging that the
artists proposed. Mikhail Larionovs cumbersome costumes for Soleil de nuit
(1915) and  Picassos Cubist style costumes for Parade (1917) both
significantly impacted upon and restricted the choreographic expression of
the ballets. Most radical of all, however, was Giacomo Ballas designs for
Stravinskys Feu dArtifice (1917), in which the dancer was banished from
the stage alltogether and the action was interpreted by the play of light
over painted canvas shapes dispersed on the stage. This represented the
most experimental period for the Ballets Russes and only really came to an
end in 1921 with the staging of Chout, a ballet-pantomime with outlandish
costumes by Larionov and a cacophanous score by Prokofiev, which proved a
critical disaster and nearly ruined the company.

The introduction of Bronislava Nijinska as house choreographer, who was
followed by George Balanchine and, finally, Serge Lifar, did much to
restablish a more correct balance of parts and the 1920s witnessed a golden
period for the Ballets Russes. The post-war trend for Neo-classicism found
expression in Picassos and Stravinskys Pulcinella (1920) and in
Goncharovas and Stravinskys Les noces (1923) whilst even Surrealism was
given an airing in Max Ernsts and Joan Mirs design for Romeo and
Juliette (1926) and De Chiricos Le bal (1929). Diaghilevs success,
however, was to maintain a balance between the high-brow and the popular
and many a contemporary theme or issue found itself addressed, celebrated
or mocked on stage. Marie Laurencins designs for Francis Poulencs Les
biches (1924), a satyrical ballet about a house-party, Picasso designs
and Chanels costumes for Darius Milhauds Le train bleu (1924) and
Yakulovs designs for Prokofievs musical reflection on the Soviet Union Le
pas dacier (1927) are typical.

On his death in 1929 the Diaghilev Revolution was complete:  he had
transformed the medium of ballet into a serious form of artistic expression
and in so doing had demonstrated the viability of modernism as a
significant force in the peforming arts. Under his guidance his
collaborators had revolutionised the role of music and the visual arts in
the theatrical context and had re-written the language of dance. When
Colonel de Basil revived the Ballets Russes in the 1930s there was really
very little else to achieve and other than to entrench the modernist
tradition in the theatre as Diaghilev had envisioned it ever more firmly
until new developments could take place after the Second World War.

References and further reading

Literature:

Bell, R. (2011), Ballets Russes: The Art of Costume, Canberra: National
Gallery of Australia

Bowlt, J. & Tregulova, Z. (2009), A Feast of Wonders: Sergei Diaghilev and
the Ballets Russes, Milan: Skira

Buckle, R. (1984), Diaghilev, London: Hamish Hamilton

Davis, M.E. (2010), Ballets Russes Style: Diaghilevs Dancers and Paris
Fashion,London: Reaktion Books

Garafola, L. (1998), Diaghilevs Ballets Russes, New York: Da Capo Press.

Grigorieff, (1960), The Diaghilev Ballet 1909-1929, Harmondsworth: Penguin.

Maryinsky Theatre (2009), Stravinsky and the Ballets Russes: Le sacre du
printemps and The Firebird. DVD. Bel Air Classics

Paris Opera Ballet (2005), Picasso and Dance: Le tricorne and Le Train
Bleu. DVD. Kultur Video

Parton, Anthony (2010), Goncharova: The Art and Design of Natalia
Goncharova, Woodbridge, UK: Antique Collectors Club

Pozharskaia, M. & Volodina, T., (1990), The Art of the Ballets Russes: The
Russian Seasons in Paris, 1908-1929, New Haven: Yale University Press.

Pritchard, J. (2009), Serge Diaghilevs Ballets Russes  An Itinerary.
Part 1: 1909-1921, in Dance Research: The Journal of the Society for Dance
Research, Vol.27, No.1 (Summer, 2009), pp. 108-198

Pritchard, J. & Marsh, G. (Eds.) (2010), Diaghilev and the Golden Age of
the Ballets Russes 1909-1929, London: Victoria & Albert Museum (major
exhibition catalogue).

Propert, W. A. (1921), The Russian Ballet in Western Europe 1909-1920,
London: John Lane/The Bodley Head

Propert, W.A. (1931), The Russian Ballet 1919-1929, London: John Lane/The
Bodley Head

Purvis, A.; Rand, A. & Winestein, A. (2009), The Ballets Russes & the Art
of Design, New York: Monacelli Press

Royal Ballet (2002), The Firebird and Les noces. DVD. BBC & Opus Arte


Scheijen, S. (2010), Diaghilev: A Life, Oxford: Oxford University Press

Schouvaloff, A. (1998), The Art of the Ballets Russes: The Serge Lifar
Collection of Theater Designs, Costumes and Paintings at the Wadsworth
Athenaeum, New Haven & London: Yale University Press.

Sorley-Walker, K. (2010), De Basils Ballets Russes, London: Dance Books

Electronic Sources:

Bowlt, J. (1987), Stage Design and the Ballets Russes, in Journal of
Decorative and Propaganda Arts, Vol. 5, No. 7, Summer 1987, pp. 28-45.
Available at JStor (pay site).
http://www.jstor.org/stable/1503934

Ballets Russes Revivals of Key Ballets on Youtube:

Europa Danse, Picasso et la Danse: Parade, Pulcinella, Mercure, Cuadro
Flamenco at
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ov5x6TYXeV8

Hodson, M. & Archer, K. & The Ballets de Monte-Carlo (1999), Le chant du
Rossignol at
http://vimeo.com/14292064

Joffrey Ballet (1988), Le sacre du printemps in 3 parts at
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jF1OQkHybEQ
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iH1t0pCchxM
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=C_7ndqgwxcM

Paris Opera Workshops, Le Train Bleu at
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8J1RRiKek4k

Maryinsky Ballet, Les noces in 2 parts at
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RDGl6bcVqSM&feature=relmfu
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jK1AnbMHQeY

