
Ball, Hugo (1886-1927)

Born in Pirmasens on 22 February 1886, the German writer Hugo Ball is best
known as the co-founder, with Tristan Tzara, of the Cabaret Voltaire and
the Dada movement in Zurich. Active initially as an Expressionist
playwright and dramaturge in Munich and as a journalist and literary critic
in Berlin in the years leading up to World War I, Ball left Germany with
his companion and future wife Emmy Hennings in 1915. They remained in
Switzerland for the rest of their lives. Following his period of Dada
activities in 1916 and 1917, Ball was a journalist for a center-left
newspaper for three years. Reconverting to the Catholic faith of his
childhood, Ball spent the remainder of his life in relative seclusion in
Ticino, where he wrote a series of religious books and revised his diaries
for publication.

Balls most influential works stem from his brief Dada period. The best-
known of these are his six sound poems of 1916, compositions comprised of
apparently meaningless syllables but filled with onomatopoeic effects and
occasional allusions to German vocabulary, intended for recitation at the
Cabaret Voltaire and similar venues [Image 1, captioned: Hugo Balls sound
poem Karawane as printed in the Dada Almanach, ed. Richard Huelsenbeck
(1920). Copy in the International Dada Archive, Special Collections,
University of Iowa Libraries].

Balls two novels also stem from his Dada period. Flametti (1918) is the
story of a mildly disreputable group of cabaret performers not unlike the
members of the Cabaret Voltaire and its predecessor, the Maxim Ensemble.
The posthumously published Tenderenda der Phantast (Tenderenda the Fantast)
(1967) is a fanciful, allegorical reworking of Balls experiences from 1914
to 1920; Dada appears as a character in the novel.

Zur Kritik der deutschen Intelligenz (Critique of the German
Intelligentsia, 1919) is a transitional work in which Ball traces Germanys
militaristic culture back to Luther and proposes that Russian anarchism and
the French Revolution should serve as models for a postwar culture. His
1924 revision of the work as Die Folgen der Reformation eliminates the
emphasis on revolution and anarchism and brings it into conformity with
conventional Catholic teachings.

Although Balls diary Die Flucht aus der Zeit (Flight Out of Time) (1927)
is considered one of the source documents of Zurich Dada, providing first-
hand accounts of many of the key events of the initial phase of the
movement, it is uncertain how reliable this account is, since the book
constitutes the authors interpretation of his life from the standpoint of
his religious conversion. The original diaries on which the book is based
have not survived.



Key Works

Tenderenda der Phantast (1967, Ball and Hammer: Hugo Balls Tenderenda the
Fantast,  2002)

Zur Kritik der deutschen Intelligenz (1919, Critique of the German
Intelligentsia, 1993)

Die Flucht aus der Zeit (1927, Flight out of Time: A Dada Diary, 1996)

Smtliche Werke und Briefe, 2003- . Ten volumes planned.

References and further reading

Mann, Philip (1987) Hugo Ball: An Intellectual Biography, London: Institute
of Germanic Studies, University of London.

White, Erdmute Wenzel (1998)The Magic Bishop: Hugo Ball, Dada Poet,
Columbia: Camden House.


