
Ballet Mchanique (1924)

Ballet Mchanique is a Dadaist, post-Cubist art film directed by artist
Fernand Lger and shot in Paris from 1923-1924. The film is photographed by
American photographer and filmmaker Dudley Murphy with some assistance by
American Modernist artist Man Ray. American composer George Antheil created
a concert piece for the film prior to viewing it by combining industrial
sounding instruments, including numerous pianos, sirens, airplane
propellers and electric bells. The completed score was thirty minutes in
length, yet since the films runtime was nineteen minutes, the two were
often not presented simultaneously or multiple-length versions of the
scored film were exhibited. Ballet Mchanique premiered as a silent version
on September 24, 1924, at the Internationale Ausstellung neuer
Theatertechnik (International Exposition for New Theater Technique) in
Vienna.
          In the film, repetitious movements of various inanimate objects,
such as pots, pans, whisks and funnels seemingly become dancers in a
ballet. These visuals are then combined with further imagery, such as a
women climbing and re-climbing stairs. The superimposition of objects and
human faces is an attempt by Lger to show his concern with modernization,
and societys evident disillusionment with the mechanical world. Multiple
angular fragmentation and contrasting light and shadow, along with various
editing rhythms and juxtapositions express the structure and reiteration of
everyday life, a distinguishing trait of modernism. Ballet Mchanique is
considered a masterpiece in experimental filmmaking and the first
completely abstract film to be photographed rather than drawn.


Further Reading:

Buck, R. (et al.) (1982). Fernand Lger. New York: Abbeville.

Chilvers, I. and Glaves J. (eds.) (2009). Dictionary of Modern and
Contemporary Art, Oxford. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Curtis, D. (1971). Experimental Cinema a Fifty-Year Evolution. New York:
Dell Publishing Co., Inc.

James, D. (2009) Jazz Modernism and Film Art: Dudley Murphy and Ballet
Mcanique,
Modernism/modernity 16(1): 25-49.

Oja, C. (2000) George Antheils Ballet Mcanique and Transatlantic
Modernism, Modern                             Mosaic: Art and Modernism in
the United States, ed. Townsend Ludington, 175-202. Chapel Hill, NC:
University of North Carolina Press.



Christina Hodel
University of Kansas
