
Ball, Hugo (1886-1927)
Timothy Shipe

Born in Pirmasens on 22 February 1886, the German writer Hugo Ball is best
known as the co-founder, with Tristan Tzara, of the Cabaret Voltaire and
the Dada movement in Zurich. Active initially as an Expressionist
playwright and dramaturge in Munich and as a journalist and literary critic
in Berlin in the years leading up to World War I, Ball left Germany with
his companion and future wife Emmy Hennings in 1915. They remained in
Switzerland for the rest of their lives. Following his period of Dada
activities in 1916 and 1917, Ball was a journalist for a centre-left
newspaper for three years. Reconverting to the Catholic faith of his
childhood, Ball spent the remainder of his life in relative seclusion in
Ticino, where he wrote a series of religious books and revised his diaries
for publication.

A series of fairly conventional romantic nature poems, published in the
local journal Der Pflzerwald, constituted Balls literary debut. Enrolling
at the University of Munich, he began work on a dissertation entitled
Nietzsche in Basel (surviving fragments published in 1978), but this work,
as well as his academic studies, remained incomplete.

The years 1910-1914 marked the period of Balls most active involvement in
the theatre scenes in Munich and Berlin. It was during these years that
Wassily Kandinsky became a key influence on Balls approach to the arts.
The advent of the war prevented the two from realizing their project to
found an artists theatre, but the Russian artists philosophy of total
theatre would inform the performances held in Zurich a few years later.

 While Ball played a significant role in German theatre during this period,
he achieved little success as a playwright. Although one play, Die Nase des
Michelangelo (1911), and the first act of another, Der Henker von Brescia
(1914), were published, none was produced in Germany in the authors
lifetime. Ball also contributed poems to several of the major Expressionist
journals. One of these poems, Der Henker (1913), published in the
inaugural issue of Revolution, caused that journal to be seized by the
authorities for obscenity (an action later reversed in court because the
poem was deemed too obscure to be obscene). In addition, Ball wrote and
published poetry pseudonymously in collaboration with Hans Leybold (signed
Ha Hu Baley) and with Klabund and Marietta di Monaco (as Klarinetta
Klaball).

Sharing with many youthful German intellectuals an initial enthusiasm for
the war, and volunteering unsuccessfully for military duty, Ball leaned
increasingly toward pacifism after witnessing the horrors of modern warfare
during a visit to the front. More and more outspoken as a journalist and
organiser of public events in Berlin, the author finally found it necessary
to emigrate to Zurich in May 1915. There, he and Hennings barely managed to
earn a living as members of a small cabaret company. In February 1916 Ball
and Hennings, together with other artists who had taken refuge in neutral
Switzerland, founded the Cabaret Voltaire, whose riotous, multilingual
performances gave rise within a few months to the Dada movement.

Balls involvement in the movement was intense, but short-lived (1916-
1917). He wrote and performed poems and sketches, lectured, and played
piano. Balls most influential works stem from this brief Dada period. The
best-known of these are his six sound poems of 1916, compositions comprised
of apparently meaningless syllables but filled with onomatopoeic effects
and occasional allusions to German vocabulary, intended for recitation at
the Cabaret Voltaire and similar venues [Image 1, captioned: Hugo Balls
sound poem Karawane as printed in the Dada Almanach, ed. Richard
Huelsenbeck (1920). Copy in the International Dada Archive, Special
Collections, University of Iowa Libraries].

Balls two novels also stem from his Dada period. Flametti (1918) is the
story of a mildly disreputable group of cabaret performers not unlike the
members of the Cabaret Voltaire and its predecessor, the Maxim Ensemble.
The posthumously published Tenderenda der Phantast (Tenderenda the Fantast)
(1967) is a fanciful, allegorical reworking of Balls experiences from 1914
to 1920; Dada appears as a character in the novel, which incorporates
some of the sound poems. Also performed at the Cabaret Voltaire were the
bitter, ironic anti-war poem Totentanz 1916 (Dance of Death) and the
short theatrical sketch Ein Krippenspiel: Bruitistisch (A Bruitist Nativity
Play) (1986); the latter is an eclectic hybrid of a sound poem and a
Christmas play (premiered in June 1916!).

Partly due to exhaustion from the intensity of the activity, partly because
of disagreements with Tzara, Ball severed his ties with Dada in May 1917.
There followed a three-year period of journalistic work, writing articles
chiefly for the centre-left newspaper Die freie Zeitung; many of these
articles have been collected in Der Knstler und die Zeitkrankheit (1984).
In 1920, Ball and Hennings married and moved with Henningss daughter to
Agnuzzo, Ticino.

Zur Kritik der deutschen Intelligenz (Critique of the German
Intelligentsia) (1919) is a transitional work in which Ball traces
Germanys militaristic culture back to Luther and proposes that Russian
anarchism and the French Revolution should serve as models for a post-war
culture. His 1924 revision of the work as Die Folgen der Reformation
eliminates the emphasis on revolution and anarchism and brings it into
conformity with conventional Catholic teachings. Nevertheless, his
religious writings were not particularly well-received by the Church
authorities.

Balls return to Catholicism was marked by a strong leaning toward
mysticism and asceticism. His own secluded life-style in  Agnuzzo after
1920 is reflected in his biography of three of the early Orthodox Desert
Fathers, Byzantinisches Christentum (1923). Ball and Hennings developed a
close friendship with Hermann Hesse, who lived nearby; Balls Hermann
Hesse: Sein Leben und sein Werk (1927) was the first published biography of
that writer.

Although Balls edited diary Die Flucht aus der Zeit (Flight Out of Time)
(1927) is considered one of the source documents of Zurich Dada, offering
first-hand accounts of many of the key events of the initial phase of the
movement, it is uncertain how reliable this account is, since the book
constitutes the authors interpretation of his life from the standpoint of
his religious conversion. Unfortunately, the original diaries on which the
book is based have not survived.

Hugo Ball died on 14 December 1927 in SantAbbondio, Ticino.



Key Works

Flametti, oder, Vom Dandysmus der Armen (1918, Flametti, or, The Dandyism
of the Poor, 2014)

Tenderenda der Phantast (1967, Ball and Hammer: Hugo Balls Tenderenda the
Fantast,  2002)

Zur Kritik der deutschen Intelligenz (1919, Critique of the German
Intelligentsia, 1993)

Die Flucht aus der Zeit (1927, Flight out of Time: A Dada Diary, 1996)

Smtliche Werke und Briefe, 2003- . Ten volumes planned.

References and further reading

Mann, Philip (1987) Hugo Ball: An Intellectual Biography, London: Institute
of Germanic Studies, University of London.

White, Erdmute Wenzel (1998)The Magic Bishop: Hugo Ball, Dada Poet,
Columbia: Camden House.


