
Carmen Van den Bergh

Balla, Giacomo (18711958)



BALLA, Giacomo Balla (Turin, July 18, 1871 - Rome, March 1,  1958),  was  an
Italian painter and one of the greatestan  important  exponents  of  futuris
futurism. He began  his  career  as  a  self-taught  artist  inheriting  the
passion for photography from his father, an industrial chemist  as  well  as
an amateur photographer. During his stays in Turin, Rome  and  Paris,  Balla
gained experience at various academies and inspired many young people  eager
for modernity, including Boccioni and Severini.

Until the first decade of the twentieth century he painted in the  tradition
of romantic realism, then Italian divisionism  before  joining  the  Futuris
futurist adventure. From 1910 onwards he put his name under several  Futuris
futurist Manifestos and became one of the first abstract artists in  Europe.
His most successful and famous paintings belong to  the  time  span  between
1912 and 1916, marked by the search for the dynamism propagated  by  Futuris
futurism,  which  he  interpreted  literally  in  the  well-known   painting
Cagnetta al guinzaglio (Dynamism of a Dog on a Leash), where  the  movements
of the animal and his master appear as multiplied steps, in accordance  with
the photographic and cinematographic principle of the persistence of  vision
(cfr. Fig1). Another means he used to suggest the sensation  of  motion  and
light an motion, was by depictingthe use of triangles,  circles,  lines  and
spirals, also called Compenetrazioni iridescenti because they could  evoke
the sensation of motion.
In his manifesto for a FuturisThe Futuristic Reconstruction of the  Universe
(March 11, 1915), he sought, together with Fortunato Depero,  to  mimic  the
shapes of the natural world in materials such as  cardboard  and  wood  with
bright colors to make it more cheerful. Fascinated  by  these  ideas,  Balla
decided to name his daughters Elica (Propeller) and Luce (Light).
Beside painting Balla also dealt with furniture and decoration (the pub  Bal
Tic-Tac in Rome), design  (the  Futuris  futuristic  Suit),  cfr.  Fig.  2),
photography, cinema and scenography (the  Fireworks  ballet  with  music  by
Stravinsky),  always in his personal style: colorful, imaginative  and  full
of rhythm.
In the 1930s Balla continued in a the Futuris futurist mode, even after
everyone else had abandoned it. He became the fascist artist par
excellence, acclaimed by critics. At the end of the decade Balla formally
broke with the Futuris futurismt activities, which placed him at the
margins of the official culture until the post-war re-evaluation of his
works and of Futuris futurismtic art in general.


References and further reading

     Giacomo Balla,Torino 1963 (catal., a cura di E. Crispolti e M. Drudi
      Gambillo, mostra alla Gall. civica d'arte moderna, con ampia bibl.,
      pp. 155-172)
     Fagiolo dellarco, (1968), Compenetrazioni iridescenti, Mario Bulzoni
     Maurizio Fagiolo Dell'Arco, (1988), Balla: The  futurist
     Giovanni Lista, 2009, Giacomo Balla:  futurismo e neo futurismo,
      Mudima, Milano.























PicturesParatextual material:

[pic]
Fig1. (coll.gen. A. Conger Goodyear, New York)

Dynamism of a Dog on a Leash, oil on canvas by Giacomo Balla, 1912;  in  the
Buffalo Fine Arts Academy, New York. Collection Albright-Knox  Art  Gallery,
Buffalo, New York; bequest of A. Conger  Goodyear  and  Gift  of  George  F.
Goodyear, 1964

Permanent Link:
http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/media/8725/Dynamism-of-a-Dog-on-a-Leash-
oil-on-canvas


[pic]
Fig.2
Illustrations made by Balla for  the  Anti-Neutral  suit  Manifesto  (1914),
rendered real and worn by Balla  himself  in  1915.  The  intention  was  to
create mens clothing that was  more  dynamic,  colorful  and  asymmetrical,
which broke with tradition and will make the men look  more  aggressive  and
belligerent.

Permanent Link:
http://www.futur-ism.it/collezioni/libri/libri.asp?sez=2&det=18

Bibliography:

     Giacomo Balla,Torino 1963 (catal., a cura di E. Crispolti e M. Drudi
      Gambillo, mostra alla Gall. civica d'arte moderna, con ampia bibl.,
      pp. 155-172)
     Fagiolo dellarco, (1968), Compenetrazioni iridescenti, Mario Bulzoni
     Maurizio Fagiolo Dell'Arco, (1988), Balla: The Futurist
     Giovanni Lista, 2009, Giacomo Balla: futurismo e neofuturismo, Mudima,
      Milano.
     Van den Bossche, B., Van den Bergh, C., Eds. (2012). Azione/reazione:
      Il futurismo in Belgio e in Europa 1909-2009. Firenze: Franco Cesati
      Editore.
     Futurism: A Microhistory, (forthcoming 2013) ed. & introd. Sascha Bru,
      Luca Somigli & Bart van den Bossche (Oxford: Maney/Legenda).


