
Beardsley, Aubrey Vincent (1872-1898)
Aubrey Beardsley was an English illustrator of the late Victorian period.
His fluid, sinuous illustrations were influenced by Japanese prints and by
the curvilinear Art Nouveau style.  Beardsley was a prominent member of the
Aesthetic Movement, a progressive group of artists and writers who pursued
the cause of art for arts sake and rejected the repressive constraints of
Victorian society.  Beardsleys drawings revelled in the decadent and the
erotic, and his public persona was that of a flamboyant dandy. Beardsleys
major creative output was concentrated into six years of intense activity.
He made his name by illustrating J. M. Dent's deluxe edition of Sir Thomas
Malory's Le Morte d'Arthur (1893-4), and produced illustrations and covers
for numerous books and periodicals.  Executed in ink, his drawings
contrasted flowing, sinuous lines with large expanses of black; they also
juxtaposed areas of intense detail with pure white space to produce an
effect that was both striking and highly decorative.  Beardsley was greatly
influenced by the languorous, curvilinear style and erotic charge of Art
Nouveau.  Like other members of the Aesthetic Movement, he also admired the
Japanese woodcuts that became popular in late Victorian Britain, emulating
their bold sense of design and use of asymmetry.
Beardsley was born in Brighton, but his father was forced to move the
family to London in 1883 after losing his inherited fortune.  His mother
taught piano lessons to supplement their income.  Both Beardsley and his
sister, Mabel, appeared in public as musical and artistic prodigies.  In
1888 Beardsley joined an architect's office, but the course of his career
changed in 1891 when, uninvited, he visited the studio of the Pre-
Raphaelite painter Sir Edward Burne-Jones (1833-1898).  Impressed by
Beardsley's drawings, Burne-Jones suggested he attend night classes at the
Westminster School of Art.  This was the only formal training Beardsley
ever received.
Beardsley formed an uneasy alliance with Oscar Wilde, the doyen of
Aestheticism.  In 1893, Wilde's scandalous play Salom was published in
France.  Beardsley was commissioned to illustrate the English edition the
following year.  His lyrical images, laced with mordant eroticism, made him
notorious within the Victorian art world.  Like Wilde, Beardsley effected
the persona of a dandy, extravagant in dress and manner.
[pic]
Aubrey Beardsley, The Dancer's Reward, 1893
http://www.artinthepicture.com/paintings/Aubrey_Beardsley/The-Dancers-
Reward/
Venturing into publishing, Beardsley co-founded a quarterly periodical
named The Yellow Book with the expatriate American author Henry Harland.
Beardsley served as art editor for the first four editions, producing the
cover designs and many illustrations.  Following Wilde's arrest for
homosexual offences in 1895, Beardsley was dismissed from his post, but he
was soon approached by the publisher Leonard Smithers to create a new
journal, The Savoy.  He used this outlet to publish his erotic tale Under
the Hill.  Smithers continued to publish works illustrated by Beardsley,
including editions of The Lysistrata of Aristophanes (1896), Pope's The
Rape of the Lock (1896) and Ben Jonson's Volpone (1898).  Smithers also
published Beardsley's A Book of Fifty Drawings (1897), the first collected
album of his work.  Mischievous by nature, Beardsley was obsessed with
eroticism and grotesquery.  Many of his later drawings featured exaggerated
phalli, revealing the influence of Japanese shunga images.
Beardsley's prodigious talents were curtailed by illness.  He had suffered
from tuberculosis intermittently from the age of nine and by 1896 he had
become an invalid.  Realising his demise was imminent he converted to
Catholicism and begged Smithers to destroy his obscene drawings.
Beardsley travelled to Menton in the south of France and died of
tuberculosis on 16 March 1898, aged only 25.
List of works
Beardsley, A. (1897) A Book of Fifty Drawings, London: Leonard Smithers.
(This volume was the first collected album of Beardsleys work).

Beardsley, A. (1899) A Second Book of Fifty Drawings, London: Leonard
Smithers.  (A second collected album of Beardsleys work).

Harris, B. (1984) Collected Drawings of Aubrey Beardsley, London: Random
House.  (An exhaustive compendium of Beardsleys drawings, featuring
recollections by his contemporary Arthur Symons).

Mallory, T. and Beardsley, A. (1972) Beardsley's Illustrations for Le Morte
dArthur, New York: Dover Publications.  (All of Aubrey Beardsley's
illustrations for Malory's Le Morte dArthur are reproduced together with
selected pages from the text).

References and further reading
Calloway, S. (1998) Aubrey Beardsley, New York: Harry N. Abrams.  (A
comprehensive, well-illustrated biography that explores the diverse
influences that were synthesised into Beardsleys work, from Ancient Greek
vases to Japanese prints).
Colvin, D. (1998) Aubrey Beardsley: a slave to beauty, London: Orion Media.
 (A lavishly-illustrated biography, this volume sheds light on Beardsleys
relationships with friends and contemporaries).

Snodgrass, C. (1995) Aubrey Beardsley: Dandy of the Grotesque, Oxford:
Oxford University Press.  (An intriguing study that examines the structure
of Beardsley's drawings and relates his work to his dandy persona).
Wilson, S. and Zatlin, L. (1998) Aubrey Beardsley: a centenary tribute.
Tokyo: Art Life Ltd. (An exhibition catalogue with text in English and
Japanese, featuring over 180 of Beardsleys illustrations).
Zatlin, L. (1990) Aubrey Beardsley and Victorian Sexual Politics. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.  (A study of Beardsleys erotic subject-matter.
The book analyses the influence of earlier pornographic artists and
Japanese prints, arguing that Beardsley was concerned with dismantling
Victorian sexual stereotypes).


