
Beier, Georgina (b. 1938, London)

Georgina Beier was born Georgina Betts in London, 1938. She enrolled at  age
sixteen in the Kingston Art School. Fifteen months later, she  dropped  out,
later claiming that had she remained  at  school,  the  academic  atmosphere
would have impeded her personal development. In 1959, she came  to  Nigeria,
where she met Ulli Beier and eventually became his second wife.

From 1964, she conducted annual  art  workshops  at  the  Mbari  Mbayo  Club
(Osogbo, Nigeria), also in  response  to  the  academic  style  of  art  she
rejected. She encouraged her students to be  authentic  instead  of  letting
themselves  be  preoccupied  with  academic  constraints.  This  illustrated
Beiers influence on African  Modernism  and  its  aesthetics.  Like  Beier,
famous artists who emerged from these workshops, such as Twins Seven  Seven,
Muraina Oyelami, and Rufus Ogundele, were never academically trained.  Beier
also participated in the theatre company of the Mbari Mbayo  Club,  painting
backdrops and designing costumes for plays  and  religious  ceremonies,  and
impacted the visual culture there.

Beier relocated with her husband to  several  places,  including  Papua  New
Guinea, Australia, India and Germany, where she continued to  run  workshops
with local artists, and her  own  artistic  practice,  including  paintings,
sculptures, textiles, lithographs, furniture  design,  murals,  mosaics  and
illustrations for publications by Ulli Beier.

References and further reading
Abiodun, Rowland. Creating her own universe, Bayreuth: Iwalewa-Haus, 1991.
Beier, Georgina. Modern Images from Niugini, Milton: Jacaranda Press, 1974.
      New Costume Designs for Yoruba Masqueraders, Bayreuth: Iwalewa-Haus,
1993.
      (et al.) Georgina Beier, Nrnberg: Verlag fr moderne Kunst, 2001.
      They keep their Fires Burning  - Conversations on Food, Manners and
Hospitality
      in Africa, Bayreuth: Breitinger, 2005.
Beier, Ulli. Decolonising the Mind - The Impact of the University of
Culture and Identity in
      Papua New Guinea, 1971-1974, Canberra: Pandanus Books, 2005.

