
Bergman, Ernst Ingmar (July 14, 1918-July 30, 2007)

Dan Humphrey (Texas A & M University)

Perhaps the exemplification of the European art-film director throughout
the late 1950s and the 1960s, Ingmar Bergman developed what would become an
almost instantly recognizable aesthetic and catalogue of concernswidely
imitated, often satirizedin a theater and cinema career spanning seven
decades.  Born in Uppsala, Sweden of parents in a troubled marriage,
Bergman spent his childhood largely at the home of a beloved maternal
grandmother. This served in part as an escape from his relationship with
his cold chaplain father.  Innumerable biographical events and familial
dynamics dating to his childhood would eventually be found in thinly
disguised dramatic form throughout Bergmans oeuvre, which often involves
sympathetically portrayed strong and intelligent women and harshly regarded
male authority figures. This is particularly the case in his final
theatrical motion picture, Fanny och Alexander (1982) (Fanny and
Alexander).

Bergman initially came to the cinema from the Swedish theater, where he,
like Orson Welles in the US a decade earlier, managed to establish a
formidable reputation by his mid-twenties.  Perhaps as a result of his work
for the stage, which Bergman continued throughout the rest of his life, the
acting in the directors films is always particularly impressive; not
surprisingly, his films are often set in the milieu of the performing arts,
with performance and creative expression as recurrent themes.

Bergmans first motion picture creditas screenwriter of the critical and
commercial success Hets (1944) (Frenzy in the UK, Torment in the
US)immediately garnered fame for the twenty-six-year-old angry young man
of the theater. He managed to secure his first directorial assignment for
the cinema within two years.  His early work as a director often seems
labored and clumsy, suggesting that had he not been working in the
relatively small and uncompetitive Swedish film industry of the late 1940s,
his later successes might not have materialized.  When exported beyond
Scandinavia, many of his early films, often concerned with youthful
rebellion, were marketed as exploitation pictures.  Sommeren med Monika
(1953) (literally, Summer with Monika), for instance, was particularly
successful in the United States in a cut, dubbed version promoted as
Monika, the story of a bad girl.  With Sommarnattens leende (Smiles of a
Summer Night 1955), Det sjunde inseglet (The Seventh Seal), and
Smultronstllet (Wild Strawberries 1957) produced and released in quick
succession, however, Bergman established himself as a celebrated film
artist around the world.

Generally eschewing the genre traditions that many of his peer auteurs
often employedJean-Luc Godard with pop art gangster films, Andrei
Tarkovski with intellectual science fictionBergman simply made dramas (or,
rarely, comedies) focusing almost always on middle-class Swedes. His
characters were typically found struggling with a variety of emotional
and/or philosophical difficulties, attempting to find meaning and value in
lives that suggest, to their increasing concern, a fundamental lack of
both.  Bergmans reputation began to decline in the late 1960s due to
suspicions that his work expressed misogyny, pessimism, and, simply put, an
overall conservative perspective (both aesthetically and ideologically).
However, the appearance of appreciative feminist, queer, and class-focused
studies in the 1990s and the early twenty-first century, as well as the
growing popularity of a handful of films that belie reductive
perspectivesthe formally radical Persona (1966), the cinematically
dazzling Hour of the Wolf (1968), the ultimately optimistic Fanny and
Alexanderhave ultimately restored to Bergman the status of a modernist
artist of the highest rank.

References and further reading:

      Bergman, I. (1994) Images: My Life in Film, New York: Arcade.
      (Bergmans own accounting of twenty-eight of his feature films.
      Rewarding, fecund.)

      Bergman, I. (1988) The Magic Lantern: An Autobiography, New York:
      Viking. (An impressionist, almost stream-of-consciousness account of
      Bergmans life. Less material on his film work than one might have
      expected.)

      Bjrkman, S. et al. (1986) Bergman on Bergman: Interviews with Ingmar
      Bergman, New York: Simon & Schuster. (Candid, revelatory interviews
      with Bergman by three Swedish critics.)

      Blackwell, M. (1997) Gender and Representation in the Films of Ingmar
      Bergman, Rochester, NY: Camden House. (First monograph in English to
      approach Bergman through the prism of feminist theory. Equally
      critical and sympathetic toward its subject.)

      Cowie, P. (1982) Ingmar Bergman: A Critical Biography, New York:
      Charles Schribners Sons. (Essential survey of Bergmans films in
      relation to his life. Complete, up to publication date, if not
      exhaustive; intelligent and yet readable.)

      Gado, F. (1986) The Passion of Ingmar Bergman, Durham, NC: Duke
      University Press. (Psychoanalytic reading of Bergmans screenplays,
      including those eventually filmed by other directors, as well as his
      stage plays, arguing for the directors Oedipal complex as a formative
      issue. Fascinating, if limited in focus.)

      Hubner, L. (2007) The Films of Ingmar Bergman: Illusions of Light and
      Darkness, New York: Palgrave. (Readable but rich in useful theoretical
      perspectives applied to Bergmans cinema.)

      Humphrey, D. (2013) Queer Bergman: Sex, Gender, and the European Art
      Cinema, Austin, TX: University of Texas Press. (Study on the
      directors perverse, or queer, qualities as understood by many of
      his original international spectators.)

      Koskinen, M. (ed.) (2008) Ingmar Bergman Revisited: Performance,
      Cinema and the Arts, London: Wallflower. (Wide-ranging anthology
      offers essays that approach Bergman as both a filmmaker and theater
      director.)

      Simon, J. (1972) Ingmar Bergman Directs, New York: Harcourt Brace
      Jovanvich. (Contains exhaustive, rigorous analyses of four Bergman
      films, along with an interview with the director himself.)

      Singer, I. (2007) Ingmar Bergman, Cinematic Philosopher: Reflections
      on His Creativity, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. (Brief yet broadly
      focused analysis of Bergmans oeuvre from the perspective of
      Continental Philosophy.)

Select filmography (as director unless otherwise noted)

Hets (Frenzy in the UK, Torment in the US) (1944) (Writer only)
Skepp till India land (Land of Desire in the UK, Frustration in the US)
(1947)
Fngelse (Prison in the UK, The Devils Wanton in the US) (1949)
Trst (Thirst, initially Three Strange Loves in the US) (1949)
Till gldje (To Joy) (1950)
Sommarlek (Summer Interlude, initially Illicit Interlude in the US) (1950)
Sommaren med Monika (Summer with Monika in the UK, initially Monika in the
US) (1953)
Gycklarnas afton (Sawdust and Tinsel in the UK, The Naked Night in the US)
(1953)
Sommarnattens leend (Smiles of a Summer Night) (1955)
Det sjunde inseglet (The Seventh Seal) (1957)
Smultronstllet (Wild Strawberries) (1957)
Ansiktet (The Magician) (1958)
Jungfrukllan (The Virgin Spring) (1960)
Ssom i en spegel (Through a Glass Darkly) (1961)
Nattvardsgsterna (Winter Light) (1963)
Tystnaden (The Silence) (1963)
Persona (1966)
Vargtimmen (Hour of the Wolf) (1968)
Skammen (Shame) (1968)
Berringen (The Touch) (1971)
Viskningar och rop (Cries and Whispers) (1972)
Scener ur ett ktenskap (Scenes From a Marriage) (1973)
Trollfljten (The Magic Flute) (1975)
Ansikte mot ansikte (Face to Face) (1976)
Das Schlangenei (The Serpents Egg) (1977)
Herbstsonate (Autumn Sonata) (1978)
Aus dem Leben des Marionetten (From the Life of the Marionettes) (1980)
Fanny och Alexander (Fanny and Alexander) (1982)
Efter repetitionen (After the Rehearsal) (1984)
Den goda viljan (The Best Intentions) (1991) (Writer only)
Sndagsbarn (Sundays Children) (1992) (Writer only)
Enskilda samtal (Private Confessions) (1996) (Writer only)
Trolsa (Faithless) (1999) (Writer only)
Saraband (2003)

Paratexual material

      http://ingmarbergman.se/en/content/start  This website, maintained by
      the Bergman Foundation, contains numerous fine images and factual
      information on the director in English.

      http://www.sweden.se/bergman  A short article on Bergman by a top
      scholar provided in English by the government of Sweden.

      From the Life of the Marionettes still should belong to Incorporated
      Television Company (ITC)

      Sawdust and Tinsel clip should belong to Sandrew-Baumanfilm AB

      Skepp till India land still should belong to Nordisk Tonefilm

      All other film clips and images should belong to Svensk Filmindustri
      (SF)






