Taylor & Francis – Encyclopedia of Modernism



About you

[Salutation]

Pedro

Juan

Bright Samper



[Enter your biography]



Universidad Jorge Tadeo LozanoBogotá, Colombia



Your article

Bermúdez Umaña, Guillermo (1924-1995)

[Enter any variant forms of your headword – OPTIONAL]

Colombian architect Guillermo Bermúdez was born close to Bogotá, the capital of Colombia. He started studying architecture at the Catholic University in Santiago de Chile, an academic programme based essentially on the precepts of the "Beaux Arts". When his family returned to Colombia he enrolled in the National University, a state funded liberal institution with a more modern approach to architecture. He obtained his degree in 1948.



After a brief spell as partner of DOMUS, a firm established with colleagues Francisco Pizano and Hernán Vieco, he established his own practice. In time he would work with several architects, including lifelong friend Fernando Martínez Sanabria and Rogelio Salmona. On later days the firm would include Pablo Lanzetta and Emilio Arango as associates.



His main body of work consists of single-family houses and low-rise apartment buildings, where his knowledge, expertise and taste were undoubtedly appreciated. 

Colombian architect Guillermo Bermúdez was born close to Bogotá, the capital of Colombia. He started studying architecture at the Catholic University in Santiago de Chile, an academic programme based essentially on the precepts of the "Beaux Arts". When his family returned to Colombia he enrolled in the National University, a state funded liberal institution with a more modern approach to architecture. He obtained his degree in 1948.



After a brief spell as partner of DOMUS, a firm established with colleagues Francisco Pizano and Hernán Vieco, he established his own practice. In time he would work with several architects, including lifelong friend Fernando Martínez Sanabria and Rogelio Salmona. On later days the firm would include Pablo Lanzetta and Emilio Arango as associates.



His main body of work consists of single-family houses and low-rise apartment buildings, where his knowledge, expertise and taste were undoubtedly appreciated. 



His work has been highlighted by several authors, especially on account to his attention to detailing and building. In his projects a certain duality within the classic and the modern seems to appear. From one point of view the idea of the free plan especially in social and public areas, where white interiors and staircases basking in light would become the key. From another, the idea that a project should be conceived and seen as a unitary whole, a more classic approach, leading to and independence between the technical solution of the roof and facades and the conception and form of interior space.



His precise design and attention to quality in construction went hand in hand with a precise knowledge and control on a house’s privacy conditions as well as a deep awareness of the different relationships between rooms and activities, personal and social, that constitute life within a house, an approach that would seem to link his projects and manner of work to the writings of Robert Kerr. His projects are characterized by an introverted experience, resulting in both a distance from the city and an enormous importance of the relationship with interior gardens. 



In 1952 he built the first stage of his own house, usually know as "casa Bermúdez", adding a master bedroom and more service areas in 1957. The house won the first prize for the best residence in the first Colombian Architecture Biennial in 1962. He would be awarded the same prize for the Bravo House and a special mention for El Polo housing project designed with Rogelio Salmona in 1964. He would later win his last national architecture prize for the Alberto Lleras Camargo building in the Universidad de los Andes designed with his son, Daniel Bermúdez Samper.



Throughout his life he combined his architectural practice with his teaching activities in the design workshops in the National University, where his precise and sometimes ironic comments were both appreciated and feared.



[File: Casa.jpg]

Figure 1 Casa Bermúdez. Photo Peter Bright



[File: casa2.jpg]

Figure 2 Casa Bermúdez. Photo Peter Bright

Source: 

https://www.flickr.com/photos/alisarincrimson/328210357/



Further reading:

 (Bermúdez, Montenegro and Niño)

(P. J. Bright Samper)

(P. J. Bright Samper)

(Charum)

(Mejía)

(O’Byrne Orozco)

(Samper and Ramírez)

(Weiss)