Taylor & Francis – Encyclopedia of Modernism



About you

[Salutation]

Jasmine

[Middle name]

Johnston



[Enter your biography]



[Enter the institution with which you are affiliated]



Your article

Birney, (Alfred) Earle (1904-1995)

[Enter any variant forms of your headword – OPTIONAL]

Earle Birney was a Canadian poet, novelist, dramatist, and professor. He was born in Calgary, and spent his childhood in rural Alberta and British Columbia. His adult life was primarily spent in Canada, the United States, and the United Kingdom. He died in Toronto. Birney’s poetics were shaped by his academic training in Old English and Middle English, and were distinctive in their avant-garde experimentations with typography, orthography, dialect, and sound media. Following training at the University of British Columbia, the University of Toronto, the University of California-Berkeley, and the University of London, he accepted a professorship in the Department of English at the University of British Columbia in 1946. His teaching led to the founding of the Department of Creative Writing at the University of British Columbia in 1965; in the same year, he departed to the University of Toronto to serve as the first writer in residence. In the decades that followed, he served as a writer in residence at many institutions.

Earle Birney was a Canadian poet, novelist, dramatist, and professor. He was born in Calgary, and spent his childhood in rural Alberta and British Columbia. His adult life was primarily spent in Canada, the United States, and the United Kingdom. He died in Toronto. Birney’s poetics were shaped by his academic training in Old English and Middle English, and were distinctive in their avant-garde experimentations with typography, orthography, dialect, and sound media. Following training at the University of British Columbia, the University of Toronto, the University of California-Berkeley, and the University of London, he accepted a professorship in the Department of English at the University of British Columbia in 1946. His teaching led to the founding of the Department of Creative Writing at the University of British Columbia in 1965; in the same year, he departed to the University of Toronto to serve as the first writer in residence. In the decades that followed, he served as a writer in residence at many institutions.



Awarded the Governor General's for David and Other Poems (1942) and Now is Time (1946), Birney also received the Order of Canada in 1970. While much of his work concerns revolutionary politics and travel experiences, some of his best-known poems concern western North America. These poems use regionally-specific locations including the Canadian Rockies and the city of Vancouver to explore broader political and social issues: individual freedoms and responsibilities, the nature of Canadian literature, and environmental degradation. 



His manifesto, ‘Living art, like anything else, stays alive only by changing’ (The Creative Writer 1966), both affirms and modifies the break with tradition prevalent in modern poetics of the twentieth century. For Birney, revision was an important way to keep his poems alive — throughout his career as poet, he changed many of his poems by replacing punctuation with blank space. His explanation of creative memory and revision can be found in his Preface to Ghost in the Wheels: Selected Poems (1977), while The Collected Poems of Earle Birney (1975) showcases the final revised forms of many of his poems.



‘David’ (David and Other Poems 1942), one of Birney’s most anthologised poems, combines his mountaineering experience in the Canadian Rockies with a dual meditation on the value of wilderness and the dilemma of euthanasia. Another of Birney’s popular poems, ‘Vancouver Lights’ (David and Other Poems 1942), also using the activity of mountaineering as poetic and explorative device, presents a mountaineer’s perspective on the city of Vancouver. Among a variety of things, ‘Vancouver Lights’ demonstrates Birney’s alignment with modern environmental poets like Robinson Jeffers. 



Poetry

David and Other Poems. Toronto: Ryerson Press, 1942.

Now Is Time. Toronto: Ryerson Press, 1945.

The Strait of Anian: Selected Poems. Toronto: Ryerson Press, 1948.

Trial of a City, and Other Verse. Toronto: Ryerson Press, 1952.

Ice Cod Bell, or Stone: A Collection of New Poems. Toronto: McClelland and Stewart, 1962.

Near False Creek Mouth: New Poems. Toronto: McClelland and Stewart, 1964.

Selected Poems: 1940-1966. Toronto: McClelland and Stewart, 1966.

Memory No Servant. Trumansburg, NY: New Books, 1968.

Pnomes, Jukollages and Other Stunzas. Toronto: Ganglia Press, 1969.

Rag and Bone Shop. Toronto: McClelland and Stewart, 1970.

The Bear on the Delhi Road: Selected Poems. London: Chatto and Windus, 1973.

What’s So Big About Green?. Toronto: McClelland and Stewart, 1973.

Alphabeings and Other Seasyours. London, ON: Pikadilly Press, 1976.

The Rugging and the Moving Times: Poems New and Uncollected 1976. Coatsworth, ON: Black 	Moss Press, 1976.

Fall by Fury and Other Makings. Toronto: McClelland and Stewart, 1978.

The Mammoth Corridors. Okemos, MI: Stone Press, 1980.

Copernican Fix. Toronto: ECW Press, 1985.

Last Makings: Poems. Toronto: McClelland and Stewart, 1991

Further reading:	

(Cameron)



Read an annotated version of ‘David’ here <http://rpo.library.utoronto.ca/poems/david>. [Poem copyright of the Estate of Earle Birney; RPO: Representative Poetry Online website copyright of the Editors and the University of Toronto.]



Read ‘Vancouver Lights’ here <http://www.library.utoronto.ca/canpoetry/birney/poem1.htm>. [Poem copyright of the Estate of Earle Birney; Canadian Poetry Online website copyright of the University of Toronto and the University of Toronto Libraries, 2000.]