
Umberto Boccioni (1882-1916)

Umberto Boccioni was born October 19, 1882 in Reggio Calabria, the son of a
couple from Romagna. His fathers governmental job forced the family to
move often, and the young Umberto pursued his studies in Genoa, Padua, and
Catania. In 1901, he moved to Rome and worked as a graphic designer and
illustrator. In Rome, he met Giacomo Balla, who introduced him to the
principles of divisionism, and he befriended Gino Severini and Mario
Sironi. He took life drawing classes at the Academy of Fine Arts and
exhibited in some local art shows. In 1906, he traveled to Paris for the
first time, eventually going also to Russia. After a brief time spent at
the Academy of Fine Arts in Venice, he moved to Milan in 1907. The artistic
environment of Milan was quite influential for the young Boccioni. He
worked as an illustrator for several publications, such as those for the
Italian Touring Club, banded together with other young artists such as
Carlo Carr and Luigi Russolo, made the acquaintance of Gaetano Previati
and, in 1910, officially joined Filippo Tommaso Marinetti as a member of
the newborn Futurist movement. Together with Carr, Russolo, Balla, and
Severini, he wrote the Manifesto of the Futurist Painters, dated February
11, 1910. In March, he took part in a famous Futurist evening at the
Politeama Chiarella in Turin, where he recited passages of the Manifesto.
The following month, he was among the major contributors to the Technical
Manifesto of Futurist Painting (April 11, 1910), signing it with Carr,
Russolo, Balla, and Severini. In July, his one-man show opened in Venice at
Ca Pesaro. His detachment from Divisionism and involvement with the
theoretical definition of a Futurist agenda for modern painting became
quite consistent between 1911 and 1912. This period is marked by the
creation of his first Futurist masterpieces, such as La citt sale (/The
Ccity rRises, 1910-1911); the two versions of the triptych Gli stati
danimo (States of Mmind, 1911); La risata (The Laugh, 1911) and Materia
(Matter, 1912). He participated in numerous Futurist happenings and
soires, and, in the winter 1911-12, he traveled repeatedly to Paris to
organize the Exhibition of Futurist Painting at the Bernheim-Jeune Gallery,
which opened in February 1912. Boccioni wrote the theoretical preface to
the catalogue and participated in several conferences that accompanied the
exhibitions opening in other European capitals. Back in Italy, in April
1912, he published the Manifesto of Futurist Sculpture and started to work
in this medium. Modern sculpture would, according to Boccioni, incorporate
a plurality of materials and capture the continuity of the environment,
abolishing the artificial concept of figures isolated from their
surroundings. He showed his sculptures, consisting of works in plaster and
assemblages, the following year in Paris at the La Botie gallery and
subsequently in Rome at the Sprovieri Gallery. His attitude toward art was
marked by a continual correlation between theoretical definition and
material experimentation. His writings from this period were influenced by
the theories of Henri Bergson and fostered a new conception of space and
matter applied to painting and sculpture. He also penned more polemical
essays aimed at charting the distinction between Futurism and Cubism.
Boccioni reworked this theoretical material, which had appeared in the form
of articles in the Florentine journal Lacerba, and turned it into a book,
Pittura, Scultura Futuriste.( Dinamismo Plastico) (Futurist Painting,
Sculpture. Plastic Dynamism, 1914). He took part in 1914 in the Futurist
pro-war demonstrations and enlisted in 1915. He died in Verona on 17 August
17, 1916 from injuries sustained falling from a horse during military
manoeuvers.

References and further reading:

