
Bose, Buddhadeva  (1908-1974)



Amiya Dev



Buddhadeva Bose was a major Bengali poet, after Rabindranath Tagore,  of  an
exemplary dedication to modernism.  He  was  also  a  novelist,  short-story
writer, essayist, playwright, childrens  writer  and  translatorauthor  of
over 150 titles.

Born in Comilla, he grew up in Noakhali and Dhaka (all in  Bangladesh  now).
While at college, he brought out with Ajit Datta  a  monthly  named  Pragati
(Progress,: 1927-1929), meaning Mmodernism. At 23, he moved  to  Kolkata,
with a distinctive book of poems and a novel to his credit,  Bandr  Bandan
(Prisoners  Song)  and  Sd  (Response),  and  took  up   writing   as
profession.  At 26, he married Protiva Som, a  singer  who  later  became  a
fiction writer.  By then he had begun teaching at Ripon  (now  Surendranath)
College.  In a year,  with  Premendra  Mitra  and  Samar  Sen,  he  began  a
quarterly solely devoted to poetry, Kavit  (Poetry,:  1935-1961),  which
became a vehicle for multiple more than one generations of poets.   He  also
started publishing the new poetry, including an anthology of modern  Bengali
poetry (dhunik Bngl Kavit, 1940, which he later edited  himself)  and  a
series of sixteen-pagers, Ek Paysy Ekti (Poems a Paysa Each).

Before long, he gave up his college job, though a  decade  later  he  joined
the newly established Jadavpur University as  the  foundinger  professor  of
Comparative Literature.  In between, he had tried his  hand  in  journalism,
had a brief assignment with UNESCO, and had been a  Fulbright  professor  in
the United States. But whatever  the  hardships,  he  had  always  been  the
happiest at his enchanted desk.

Buddhadeva Bose was author of seventeen books of poems and a book  of  poems
for children. He began flowingly, but without  compromising  skill  (witness
Kankbat), grew terse before long  (Je  ndhr  lor  Adhik[The  Darkness
that Is More than Light]showed it most), and  closed  with  terseness  and
flow combined (as in his last book Svgatabidy o  Anynya  Kavit[Welcome
Farewell and Other Poems]).  Part of this output was in prose, he  being  a
champion of the prose poem.  In novels, which he wrote in  a  great  number,
his prime contribution was the  stream  of  consciousness  (his  masterpiece
Tithidor[Sacred Ties]was full of it) and a touch of  the  poetic.   This
latter was also true of his later short stories.  His essays  were  numerous
and of various kinds: belles-lettres, travelogues, autobiography and,  above
all, criticism. He wrote extensively on his great predecessor,  Rabindranath
Tagore, and also on  his  contemporaries,  especially  Jibanananda  Das  and
Sudhindranath Datta. His last years were largely spent  on  a  book  on  the
Mahbhrata (Mahbhrater Kath), preceding which he wrote four  verse-plays
on themes taken from it (Klsandhy[Darkness at Noon]being one). He  had
already written a play on Rishyasringa, Tapasv  o  Tarangin  (The  Hermit
and the Courtesan), and one on Electra (Kolktr [Kolkatas] Electra).

His main translations were of Klidsas Meghadta, Baudelaires Les  Fleurs
du Mal, and selections from Hlderlin and Rilke.  A champion of  his  mother
tongue, he wrote English only occasionally,  An  Acre  of  Green  Grass  (on
current Bengali writing) and Tagore: Portrait of a Poet being two  principal
instances.



Timeline

1927-1929: Monthly Pragati, devoted to modernism

1930: Bandr Bandan, book of poems

1935-1961: Quarterly Kavit, solely devoted to poetry

1949: Tithidor, novel

1958: Je ndhr lor Adhik, book of poems

1961: Charles Baudelaire: Tnr Kavit, translation of Les Fleurs du Mal

1966: Tapasv o Tarangin, play

1974 (posthumous): Mahbhrater Kath, criticism

Further Reading

Dasgupta, Alokeranjan. Buddhadeva  Bose,  MIL  Series  (New  Delhi:  Sahitya
Akademi, 1977)

Sengupta, Samir. Buddhadeva Basur Jban (Kolkata: Vikalp, 1998, rev. 2008).

Datta, Jyotirmoy, ed. Kolkt: Buddhadeva Basu Samkhy (Kolkata:  Pratibhas,
2002).

Dyson, Ketaki Kushari, trans., Selected  Poems  of  Buddhdeva  Bose  (Oxford
University Press India, 2003).

Dev, Amiya. Buddhadeva Basu (Kolkata: Bangiya-Sahitya-Parishat, 2006).

Svgata Samlp:  Buddhadeva  Basuke  Nibedita,  ed.  under  Buddhadeva  Basu
Satabarsha Samitis supervision (Kolkata: Deys Publishing, 2008).

Sinha, Arunava, trans., When  the  Time  Is  Right  (Tithidore  in  English)
(Penguin India, 2012).

Dev, Amiya. Dui Tirise: October-November/ Sudhndranth Datta  o  Buddhadeva
Basu (Kolkata: Ebang Mushayera, 2012), pp. 83ff.

