Taylor & Francis – Encyclopedia of Modernism



About you

[Salutation]

Maria

[Middle name]

Ioniţă



[Enter your biography]



Ryerson University



Your article

Brakhage, Stan (1933-2003)

Robert Sanders

Stan Brakhage (born Robert Sanders) was an American filmmaker and one of the most important figures of experimental cinema, noted for his abstract, lyrical style. His eclectic body of work ranges from narrative to non-narrative features, animation as well as virtually unclassifiable pieces that combine film with painting and collage. Brakhage is known for his complex techniques such as rapid, rhythmic cutting, multiple exposures, scratching the emulsion, and painting or applying organic materials directly on celluloid.

Stan Brakhage (born Robert Sanders) was an American filmmaker and one of the most important figures of experimental cinema, noted for his abstract, lyrical style. His eclectic body of work ranges from narrative to non-narrative features, animation as well as virtually unclassifiable pieces that combine film with painting and collage. Brakhage is known for his complex techniques such as rapid, rhythmic cutting, multiple exposures, scratching the emulsion, and painting or applying organic materials directly on celluloid.



After dropping out of Darmouth College and the San Francisco Art Institute, Brakhage moved to New York in 1954, where he began associating with artists like Maya Deren, Jonas Mekas, Marie Menken, Joseph Cornell (with whom he collaborated on 1960‘s Gnir Rednow and 1955’s Centuries of June) and John Cage (who provided the soundtrack for 1955’s In Between).



Recognition came somewhat slowly for Brakhage and in the late 50s had to turn to making industrial shorts for a living. By the late 60s however, he was a reputed artist and started teaching aesthetics and film at the Art Institute of Chicago and the University of Colorado. In 2002 he retired and settled in Canada where he died a year later.



Stan Brakhage’s body of work is vast (around 400 films), diverse, and far more eclectic than those of Jonas Mekas or Marie Menken, with whom he is sometimes compared. Most of his works shun narrative, cohering instead around recurring sets of images assembled via complexly timed editing: Window Water Baby Moving (1959) presents the birth of his daughter Myrena as a set of permutations involving light streaming through windows, images of Brakhage’s wife, Jane at various stages in her pregnancy, and the moment of the birth of the child itself. The increasingly rapid pace of editing builds towards an epiphany that culminates with the child emerging into the world. At the opposite end of the spectrum is The Act of Seeing with One’s Own Eyes (1971), which is an unnervingly graphic footage of autopsies shot in a Pittsburgh morgue and a veritable memento mori for the modern world.



Brakhage considered cinema a form of ‘moving visual thinking’, free from the constricting structures of language, which he called ‘a damnation of human sensibility’ (1997: 36). The vast majority of his films are completely silent. His interest in the biology of vision led him to study the perception of light and the ‘closed-eye vision’ - the image after effects, shapes and colors we perceive with our eyes closed, and which he sought to emulate in his films. Such a form of filmmaking is not only a-linguistic, but it also deliberately shuns the limitations of traditional compositional perspective, and instead thrives in the absence of clearly articulated images. Essentially, Brakhage is search is for a near-mystical experience, where the process of reception dominates interpretation and art becomes a process of pure subjective interiority. Films like Mothlight (1963), made without a camera, by gluing insect wings and bits of vegetation to the film strip, Chinese Series (2003), which Brakhage scratched directly on celluloid during the last weeks of his life, or Glaze of Cathexis (1990) with its colorful painted and scratched over images of trees, have an almost textural feel that transcends the very notion of what cinema can achieve.



Selected Filmography

Window Water Baby Moving (1969)

Dog Star Man (1961-1964)

The Act of seeing with One’s Own Eyes (1971)

23rd Psalm Branch (1967)

The Garden of Earthly Delights (1981)

Commingled Containers (1997)

Delicacies of Molten Horror Synapse (1991)

Glaze of Cathexis (1990)

Mothlight (1963)

Chinese Series (2003)

Further reading:

 (Andyfshito)

 (Brakhage, Film at Wit's End: Eight Avant-Garde Filmmakers)

(Brakhage, Telling Time: Essays of a Visionary Filmmaker)

(Brakhage, "Another Way of Looking at the Universe." Interview with Ronald Johnson)

(Elder)

(Non-Compliance)

(Solomon)