
Brncui, Constantin (1876-1957)

[pic]

Brancusi, Maiastra (1911)

https://www.tate.org.uk/art/artworks/brancusi-maiastra-t01751





Constantin Brncui is one of the great masters of modern and contemporary
art. The influence of his work can be felt across both the avant-garde and
neo-avant-garde movements. Although he can be considered the early master
of minimalism and abstractionism, Constantin Brncui admitted to be in the
search of realism in sculpture. The extensive work of the Romanian born
artist was dedicated, as he claimed, to 'sculpture's own life'. Born in the
Romanian village of Hobia in 1876, Brncui was profoundly influenced by
vernacular philosophy as well as by traditional carving techniques,
reflecting a rising European sensibility for the ancestral treatment of the
form. In 1903 Brncui left for Paris on foot and was admitted there to
cole Nationale des Beaux-Arts. Refusing to work under Auguste Rodin, he
started to develop his own body of work: essentialised forms which condense
the search for an archetypal humanism. The Kiss (1907) was one of his first
sculptures, which introduced his specific technique of direct carving.
Brncui chose primordial concepts as titles (e.g.Child, Fish, Prayer,
Pride) which reflected his spiritual quest in art. In 1907, Brncui worked
with Guillaume Apollinaire, Fernand Lger, Amedeo Modigliani and Marcel
Duchamp in Montparnasse. In 1913, the first exhibition of Modern Art In the
United States  The Armory Show  featured his work.

Brncuis organic forms, the integration of the pedestal into the body of
the work, the predilection for tactile textures and purity of form, reveal
the influence of African art, the oriental philosophy he was preoccupied
with and the teachings of Plato.
Brncui returned to Romania in 1938 where he began the Sculptural Ensemble
of Trgu Jiu, an open air ensemble, conceived by him as a homage to the
Romanian heroes of the First World War. The three pieces - the Table of
Silence, the Gate of the Kiss and the Endless Column represent symbolic
forms with which Brncui had previously worked: Brncui affirmed that the
the rhomboidal modules originated in a traditional press screw. Along with
historic references attached to each of the three pieces, various religious
and esoteric symbolisms have been attributed to the column as an axis
mundi, to the stone Table of Silence with twelve seats (as the twelve
apostles) and to the entrance gate to the ensemble, the Gate of Kiss, as a
gate to the transcendent.  Shortly after completing the piece, Brncui was
declared an enemy of the communist regime for not representing the official
'social realist' style in his work. In 1964, after his death, he was
'rehabilitated' and his work in Trgu Jiu was restored for the first time.
As a consequence of the refusal of the communist Romanian regime to accept
the pieces which Brncui left after his death in his atelier, the Centre
Pompidou in Paris took custody of the work, where they remain on permanent
display. Miastra (1911) is considered his masterpiece: it reproduces a
celestial being from Romanian mythology, similar to the Persian
Simurgh/Phoenix,  the light bird from the Other World. From 1911 until his
death, he worked on more than twenty versions of this piece; with the
repetition of his fundamental shapes, he introduced the notion of seriality
to modern art. He was also responsible for incorporating the plinth into
the object, making it an integral part of the work.  His famous quote
'Simplicity is complexity resolved' can be considered paradigmatic for the
avant-gardes and neo-avantgardes.



SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY
Beck E. (2007), Brancusi's Endless Column: Targu-Jiu, Romania (World
Monuments Fund), Scala Arts & Heritage, London.

Geist, S.  (1969), Constantin Brancusi, 1876-1957: A Retrospective
Exhibition, New York. The Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum.

Giedion-Welcker C. (1959), Constantin Brancusi, George Braziller, New York

Gimenez C. and Matthew G. (2004), Constantin Brancusi: The Essence of
Things, Tate Publishing, London

Hultn P., Dumitresco, N., Istrati A. Brancusi, (1987) Abrams, New York

Pearson J. (2010), Constantin Brancusi. Sculpting the essence of Things,
Crescent Moon Publishing, Kent

Shanes E. (1989), Constantin Brancusi, Abbeville Press, New York.


Varia R. (2003), Brancusi, Rizzoli, New York








