
Braxton, Anthony
Dustin Garlitz


Anthony Braxton, born 4 June 1945 in Chicago, Illinois, is an avant-garde
jazz multi-instrumentalist and composer. He performs and records primarily
on saxophones. Active in avant-garde jazz and improvised musics since the
1960s, Braxton was an early member of the AACM (Association for the
Advancement of Creative Musicians), a Chicago-founded cooperative of
African American avant-garde jazz musicians and composers. Braxton is a
Professor of Music at Wesleyan University in Middleton, Connecticut, where
he has taught since 1990. He was awarded a MacArthur Foundation Fellowship
in 1994, and was named a 2014 National Endowment for the Arts Jazz Master
in 2013. His compositions have been performed by large scale orchestras at
Lincoln Center in New York City, among other renowned venues that have
often been reserved for classical music.

Notable early albums of Braxton include Three Compositions of New Jazz
(1968), released on the Chicago-based Delmark record label that many of the
early AACM members first released albums on in the mid to late 1960s.
Braxtons double album For Alto, a solo recording, was released in 1970.
Braxton has performed on many saxophones throughout his career, most
notably the alto saxophone, but later soprano, sopranino, C-melody, F mezzo-
soprano, baritone, bass, and contrabass saxophones. He has also performed
on flute, the E-flat, B-flat, and contrabass clarinets, and the piano.

A noted composer, he often leads large ensembles that perform his highly
intricate compositions for which he has gained a reputation in avant-garde
music. Over the course of his musical career, Braxton has released works
for opera, large scale orchestra, and his avant-garde interpretation of
traditional jazz standards. Braxton often names his avant-garde
compositions as diagrams, and they have progressed to incorporate drawings
and illustrations. Braxtons diagrams are usually labeled with cryptic
numbers and letters. The titles of these pieces themselves may be musical
notation indicating to the performer how to play the piece.



See Also: Coleman, Ornette; free jazz; free improvisation; Zorn, John

Further Readings:

Broomer, Stuart. Time and Anthony Braxton. Toronto: Mercury Press
Publishers, 2009.

Heffley, Mike. The Music of Anthony Braxton. Westport, CN: Greenwood Press,
1996.

Lock, Graham. Blutopia: Visions of the Future and Revisions of the Past in
the Work of Sun Ra, Duke Ellington, and Anthony Braxton. Durham, NC: Duke
University Press, 1999.

Radano, Ronald Michael. New Musical Figurations: Anthony Braxtons Cultural
Critique. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1993.
