
DIE BRCKE (THE BRIDGE)

Convinced that art should be an expression of life representing the
vitality of the times, four architecture students in Dresden joined
together to found Die Brcke (The Bridge) in 1905. The name, suggested by
one of their founding members, Karl Schmidt-Rotluff, reflected their
intention to provide a bridge between the art of previous generations and
that of the new era of the twentieth century.

As the initiator of Die Brcke and its chief spokesman, Ernst Ludwig
Kirchner had the audacious idea of renewing German art. He was joined by
Fritz Bleyl, Erich Heckel, and Karl Schmidt-Rottluff, fellow students
studying at Dresdens Technische Hochschule (Dresden Technical Institute).
In preceding years, both Kirchner, who had taken a leave to study art, and
Bleyl had been working on woodcuts influenced heavily by the earlier
Jugendstil. While Bleyl remained interested in the illusion of space,
Kirchner had begun to simplify his style to include greater planarity, with
jagged lines providing delineation and contour, creating a two-dimensional
effect already indicative of his signature stylistic innovations of the
future.

Bleyls involvement in the Brcke movement was primarily based on his
friendship with Kirchner; his style remained more akin to Impressionism
than Expressionism. Heckel, however, along with Schmidt-Rottluff,
contributed significantly to the development of Expressionism. He admired
many of the Old Masters and focused particularly on the planarity and use
of color evident in the work of Vermeer. Heckel rejected the bourgeois
values inherent in both form and content of the art of the past, although
his work continued to be somewhat tempered and harmonious in comparison to
Kirchners.

Like Heckel, Schmidt-Rottluff was a self-taught artist whose immediate
appeal to the group was his flamboyant use of color and his passionate self-
expression. Also influenced by Jugendstil and Impressionism, he learned the
art of the woodcut from Kirchner. Schmidt-Rottluffs use of shape and line
and the arrangement of space in his compositions were transformed by the
practice of this technique.

The four friends set up a studio in an empty butcher shop in a workers
quarter of Dresden. There they lived and worked together intuitively and
intensely, pursuing goals that were essentially the sameto banish the bias
and formalism, ornamentation and lack of emotion, in the art then
prevalent. In their view, art was to be at once inventive and illustrative
and ardently expressive.

In addition to creating woodcuts in the manner of medieval German
practitioners, an important medium for the group, the members of Die Brcke
also practiced etching, lithography, wood carving, drawing, and painting.
They were further influenced by the work of Japanese printmakers, African
tribal art, and sculpture of the South Seas. A number of their
contemporaries, including Vallotton, Gauguin, and especially Munch and van
Gogh, played an important role as precursors of Expressionism and provided
inspiration to the members.  The Brcke group followed their example in
devising personal imagery rendered in heavy line, strong color, and thick
brushstrokes.

Die Brcke expanded in 1906 by taking on Emil Nolde (who remained a member
of the group for a relatively brief time) and Max Pechstein, an artist of
singular skill and proficiency. Both Nolde and Pechstein participated in
the first Brcke exhibition in 1906, staged in a light-fixture showroom in
a factory among hanging lamps designed for the typical bourgeois consumer
of the period. The exhibit did not draw a large audience, and little
approbation from those that attended. The critic Paul Fechter was an
important exception with his review in the Dresdner Neueste Nachrichten,
identifying the group as a rising new movement in art.

Kirchner wrote the manifesto of Die Brcke and cut it into wood, printing
it by hand in 1906. Later that year, two foreign members were added to the
group: the Finnish Axel Gallen-Kallela, who had moved from a naturalistic
style to dramatic representations of Finnish myths and legends that evoked
admiration from the Brcke members; and the Swiss Cuno Amiet, who had
studied in Paris and Munich, and who joined the artistic community at Pont-
Aven in Brittany in 1892. Influenced by Hodler upon his return to
Switzerland, he nonetheless retained his individualistic, intensely
brilliant color palette which, along with his large planes of color,
commended him to the Dresden group.

Also in 1906, Die Brcke began publishing an annual portfolio of prints
produced by the members for their supporters. From approximately 1907, the
development of the group focused on an effort to unify figure and
landscape, experiencing nature first-hand and studying the human body
moving about freely in natural surroundings. Moritzburg in the lake
district near Dresden and the moor country as well as the nearby islands
became the settings for their studies and experimentation together and
separately.

A second small exhibit of graphic works by the Brcke artists in winter of
1906/1907 also included woodcuts by Wassily Kandinsky, who was visiting
Dresden at the time. The following fall, a larger exhibition at the Salon
Richter in Dresden again met with disfavor. In 1908, at the instigation of
Pechstein, the fauvist painter Kees van Dongen was invited to exhibit his
work with the Brcke, which had its own gallery as part of the New
Secession in Berlin from 1908 to 1911. The Silesian artist Otto Mller, the
last member to join the Brcke, did so after its important exhibit at the
Galerie Arnold in Dresden in 1910, which included their first published
exhibition catalog, a significant document of the Expressionist movement.

The Brcke artists finally achieved renown as a result of an exhibition
held at the Galerie Fritz Gurlitt in Berlin in April 1912. Their
individualistic styles had achieved fruition by 1911 and their work was no
longer as consistent as it was earlier. But this, plus the dynamics of the
Berlin art world, where almost all of the members had relocated, undermined
the cohesion of the group. When Kirchners text for a jointly planned
chronicle of the Brcke in 1913 did not meet the majoritys expectations,
the group severed its affiliation and Die Brcke dissolved.

References:

Gordon, Donald E. Expressionism, Art and Idea. New Haven, London: Yale
University Press, 1987.

Selz, Peter. German Expressionist Painting. Berkeley, Los Angeles:
University of California Press, 1974.





