Taylor & Francis – Encyclopedia of Modernism



About you

[Salutation]

	Natalja 	

[Middle name]

Chestopalova



[Enter your biography]



Ryerson University



Your article

Buber, Martin (1878-1965)

[Enter any variant forms of your headword – OPTIONAL]

Existential philosopher, essayist, translator and editor, Martin (Mordechai) Buber (מרטין בובר) was born in Austria and spent his earlier years studying in Vienna and Lemberg (now Lvov, Ukraine), eventually moving to Germany and Israel. Focusing on biblical hermeneutics and ethics, much of Buber’s writing is dedicated to the revival of religious Jewish consciousness through the idea of a transformed Zionist movement. Buber’s translation of the Hasidic tales, Die Geschichten des Rabbi Nachman (1906; The Tales of Rabbi Nachman), Die Legende des Baal Schem (1908; The Legend of the Baal Shem) and his original translation of the Hebrew Bible into German have remained valuable contributions to the study of spirituality, pacifism and human relations. Published in 1923, Buber’s most influential philosophical essay Ich und Du (I and Thou, 1937) is an articulation of the dialogic principle, or the duality of primal relations. In I and Thou Buber offers an ethical perspective by distinguishing between the I-Thou relations that stress the dialogical, mutual, holistic existence, and the monological I-It relations that objectify and dehumanize other beings. Buber allocates this dialogical relation to the very foundation of biblical faith and suggests that an authentic relationship to God is only possible through a dialogical life of existential responsibility.

Existential philosopher, essayist, translator and editor, Martin (Mordechai) Buber (מרטין בובר) was born in Austria and spent his earlier years studying in Vienna and Lemberg (now Lvov, Ukraine), eventually moving to Germany and Israel. Focusing on biblical hermeneutics and ethics, much of Buber’s writing is dedicated to the revival of religious Jewish consciousness through the idea of a transformed Zionist movement. Buber’s translation of the Hasidic tales, Die Geschichten des Rabbi Nachman (1906; The Tales of Rabbi Nachman), Die Legende des Baal Schem (1908; The Legend of the Baal Shem) and his original translation of the Hebrew Bible into German have remained valuable contributions to the study of spirituality, pacifism and human relations. Published in 1923, Buber’s most influential philosophical essay Ich und Du (I and Thou, 1937) is an articulation of the dialogic principle, or the duality of primal relations. In I and Thou Buber offers an ethical perspective by distinguishing between the I-Thou relations that stress the dialogical, mutual, holistic existence, and the monological I-It relations that objectify and dehumanize other beings. Buber allocates this dialogical relation to the very foundation of biblical faith and suggests that an authentic relationship to God is only possible through a dialogical life of existential responsibility.



List of works

Buber, M. (1962-1963) Werke, Munich and Heidelberg: Kösel Verlag and Lambert Schneider, 3 vols. 

------ (2001--) Martin Buber Werkausgabe, ed. P. Mendes-Flohr, P. Schäfer in cooperation with M. Urban, Gütersloh: Gütersloher Verlagshaus 

------ (1923) Ich und Du, trans. R. G. Smith as I and Thou, Edinburgh: T. and T. Clark

------ (1947) Between Man and Man, trans. R. G. Smith, London: Routledge, 2002.

------ (1957) Pointing the Way: Collected Essays, trans. and ed. M. Friedman, New York: Harper & Row.

------ (1983) ‘A Letter to Gandhi’, in P. Mendes-Flohr (ed.) A Land of Two Peoples: Martin Buber on Jews and Arabs, New York: Oxford University Press.

Further reading:



(Buber, Chuang-Tzu and Herman)



(Buber and Rogers, The Martin Buber-Carl Rogers Dialogue: A New Transcript with Commentary)



(Friedman)



(Friedman, Martin Buber and the Covenant of Peace)



(Smith)