
Burmese Modernism

N.B. Editors please note that Permissions for these images have been
already granted to the author verbally by the copyright holders for use in
his book on Burmese painting and any other educational publications.

     Aggressive modernistic painting in Burma first appeared in the 1940s,
with greater force in the 1950s, and as a full-fledged movement in the
1960s. An element of painting of Burma is its lateralism, whereby Realist
or Modernist styles have persistently drawn from a surviving wellspring in
traditional arts. In the 1940s-60s, artists sought an indigenous
development that did not mimic foreign aesthetics and began to look
backwards into their ancient mural painting at Pagan, 800 years earlier,
which was in many ways anticipated surrealism and abstraction. However, by
the late 1970s, modernism began to wane. In 1987 when Burma began to open
to the outside world, an older mastery in Realist and Impressionist
painting, acquired in Burma through Ba Nyan (1897-1945) who studied in
London in the 1920s, dominated the countrys painting style. From the late
1990s onwards, however, modernism in Burma experienced a vigorous
resurgence.

Birth of Modernism
     The movement towards abstraction in the 1940s-60s was initiated by Kin
Maung (Bank) (c.1908-83), the Father of Modernism in Burma. Kin Maung was
an amateur painter who read English and was familiar with international art
movements. He delivered papers and workshops in Burma, urging painters to
develop modernist styles. He understood that Burmas conservative Buddhist
culture frowned on art that was jarring, dislocating, or violent, unless it
enhanced the thought of the Buddha, and thus he advocated a gradual
negotiation towards modernism. He encouraged painters to rediscover
Buddhist paintings at Pagan, where phantasmagoric tableaus were common, and
travelled there with several Modernist painters to study these ancient
works.

      Not every modern painting was influenced by Burmas traditional
corpus. Burmese modernists were aware of their dilemma: they could not
renovate ancient styles but neither should they copy the West. Instead they
aimed to find a distinct, contemporary style of painting, which reflected
Burmese culture. Sometimes this ingenuity revealed itself in a single work
or handful of works, and the painter turned to fresh syncretisms between
the traditional and the modern, or the international and Burmese.

      Kin Maungs oeuvre was small but his range was wide: it included
Realism, Impressionism, Semi-Cubist work, and figurative and non-figurative
Expressionism. His oil painting Modern Palette is an intriguing mix of the
historical icons of Burmese culture in a style that he apparently never
repeated
[pic]

Kin Maung (Bank). Modern Palette. Oil on canvas. 34 x 31.25 inches (87 x 80
cm). Collection of NM Gallery, Yangon.

     Aung Khin (1921-96) abhorred mimicry of the West, but much of his work
was influenced by Picasso and Van Gogh. Nonetheless, he found his torturous
way to an original expression. He concluded that the essential element in
powerful abstract work was crazy colours  but insisted that Burmese
painting should smell Burmese. One of his outstanding works is Iron
Workers, with its unusual colours and Pagan influence in the stiff figures
with black outlines. In Aung Khins last paintings, he depicted the
heavenly and hellish realms of Burmese Buddhism in non-figurative abstract
works, a daring but logical step inasmuch as these realms were beyond
figurative perception.

[pic]

Aung Khin. Iron Workshop. 1995. Oil on canvas. 27 x 36 inches (61 x 92 cm).
Collection of Myat Min, Yangon.

      Three catalysts of the modernist movement of the 1960s were Paw Oo
Thet (1936-93), Win Pe (1936), and Kin Maung Yin (1938). Paw Oo Thet and
Win Pe were students of Kin Maung. Early in their careers, they were also
influenced by Dong Kingman, the Chinese-American watercolourist, through a
correspondence course, the Famous Artists School, where Kingman taught. Ba
Nyans early Realist (and occasional Impressionist) paintings were full of
dark colours, chiaroscuro and impasto, and Kingmans watercolours were
light, bright and vivid. Paw Oo Thet began painting colourful semi-cubist
watercolours of Burmas temples and comic depictions of Burmese
peoplewearing grandly expanded grinsthat became popular among Burmese
audiences. Win Pe also executed vivid watercolours with flourishes of
Expressionism.
[pic]
Paw Oo Thet. Three Blind Men. Date and dimensions not provided. Oil.
Photograph courtesy of Paw Oo Thet family.

     Like Kin Maung, much of Paw Oo Thets exceptional oil work was done in
a style that appeared in a single painting and was never repeated. Three
Blind Men, an oil colour painting only available for reproduction in black
and white, is one such work. The same episodic brilliance is true of Kin
Maung Yin.

[pic]

Kin Maung Yin. Portrait of POT (Paw Oo Thet). 1964. Oil on canvas attached
to board. 19 x 11 inches (49 x 28 cm). Collection of Paw Oo Thet Family,
Mandalay.
      Bagyi Aung Soe (1924-90) has had the most dramatic influence on
contemporary modernism. In his time, he was little understood and often
maligned, sometimes referred to as psychotic. He studied painting at
Santiniketan, the institution in India established by Rabindranath Tagore,
but inexplicably returned from the school early. Of the early modernists,
Aung Soe most liberally embellished techniques from Pagan, but he also drew
from many other sources including Japanese sumi-e, traditional and modern
Indian painting, Western Expressionism, and from his friend, the Indonesian
painter Affandi, whom he met at Santiniketan.

     Aung Soe was enthralled by the primitive and magical power of
traditional art, and filled his work with occult, cabalistic symbols. This
reflected age-old tensions in Burmese culture because, although Buddhism
was the means towards enlightenment, the occult had been deeply embedded in
Burmese culture since pre-Buddhist, pre-Pagan times. Aung Soe understood
this dichotomy and captured it in his paintings. But he also painted works
of many other subjects, as in his black-and-red series where he explored
savage expressions of human consciousness.

[pic]
Bagyi Aung Soe. Bearded Man Behind Bar. Appears to be mixed media. 14.75 x
12.5 inches (38 x 32 cm). This may be a self-portrait. Collection of NM
Gallery, Yangon.


The Resurgence of Modernism
     The advent of modernism did not push the older school of Realism and
Impressionism aside. Ba Nyans enormous influence on modernnot
modernisticpainting lingered in the work of countless painters. As Burma
opened its doors, painters of the Ba Nyan school found their work avidly
sought by collectors. By the year 2000 focus changed. Burma slowly
modernied and awareness penetrated the art community that Realism and
Impressionism were, inevitably, archaic forms. A second generation of
modernists, born in the 1940s and early 1950s, had had difficulty capturing
the attention of art enthusiasts, but they were boosted by a younger
generation of modernists. Imaginative abstract paintings surfaced rapidly,
many drawing from Burmese traditions in the characteristic lateral manner.


References and further reading
Ah Mar, Daw. (1997) Modern Burmese Painting. (In Burmese.) Yangon: Yar Pyae
Publ. and Kyee Pwar Yae Publ. (Anecdotal history of Mandalay, not Rangoon,
painters. Colourful recollections of Kin Maung, Aung Khin, Paw Oo Thet.)

Ker, Y. (2005-06) Modern Burmese Painting According to Bagyi Aung Soe.
The Journal of Burmese Studies, vol. 10. (Analytical study of Aung Soes
works. 20 Illustrations. )

Nyan Shein. (2000) On Burmese Painters, Sculptors, and Architects, vol. 2.
(In Burmese.) Yangon: Daw Mya Mya, Printing and Publ. (Includes
biographical sketches of Kin Maung, Aung Soe, Paw Oo Thet.)

Ranard, A. (2009) Burmese Painting: A Linear and Lateral History.
Chiang Mai: Silkworm Books. (Periodic history of Burmese painting, from
Pagan era to present. 349 illustrations.)

------(2013) Burmese Painting: River of Unknowns, Arts of Asia, vol. 43,
Issue 3. (Concise history of modern Burmese painting. 41 illustrations.)

Thanegi, Ma. (2004) Paw Oo Thett, His Life and His Creativity. Yangon:
Swiftwinds Services. (Catalog. Paw Oo Thets works with short biography.
Over 100 illustrations.)




