
Busoni, Ferruccio (1866-1924)

Marc-Andr Roberge


Ferruccio Busoni was an Italian composer, pianist, transcriber, editor, and
writer on music who spent most of his career in Germany. A child prodigy
who started composing at the age of seven and completed his formal music
studies at fifteen, he became of one the most important pianists of his
time, well known for his transcriptions of organ works by Bach, and a
highly respected, if rather rarely played, composer. His writings on music,
in some of which he longed for an extension of compositional means and
resources, positioned him as a progressive thinker and a model for a young
generation of composers, including Edgard Varse and Kurt Weill.

Biography

Ferruccio Busoni was born in Empoli, near Florence, on 1 April 1866, as the
only child of the clarinettist Ferdinando Busoni and of the pianist Anna
Weiss. After early instruction in piano from his mother and violin lessons,
he entered the Vienna Conservatory in 1875; he then studied music theory
and composition privately in Graz with Wilhelm Mayer from 1879 to 1881. He
had started composing in 1873, in which year he also gave his first
recital, eventually becoming one of the major pianists of his time, known
for his monumental style and for his championship of Bach, Mozart, and
Liszt.

After a series of one or two-year appointments as piano teacher in
Helsinki, Moscow, and Boston starting in 1888 and a short period as a free-
lance pianist based in New York, Busoni moved to Berlin in 1894, where he
taught several private pupils who later made a successful career, for
instance Rudolph Ganz, Mark Hambourg, Egon Petri, Eduard Steuermann, and
Gino Tagliapietra. He made four concert tours in the United States (1904,
1910, 1911, and 1915) but had to extend the last one for several months
because the impending war made it difficult for an Italian to return to
Germany. He lived in a self-imposed exile in Zurich between 1915 and 1920,
where he gave concerts and master classes in addition to conducting the
Tonhalle concerts during one season. He came back to Berlin in 1920, where
Kurt Weill and Wladimir Vogel were among the students of his master class
in composition at the Akademie der Knste. A charismatic personality and a
highly respected figure in German musical life, he attracted musicians and
intellectuals in the open house he held in his apartment. He wrote
extensively on music, publishing his collected essays in 1922 under the
title Von der Einheit der Musik. Busoni, who had given up his concert
activities in the same year as a result of health problems, died in Berlin
on 27 July 1924 before completing his greatest masterpiece, the opera
Doktor Faust.

Reception

Until the mid-1960s a secondary figure mostly associated with his
transcriptions of organ works by Bach and his successes as a touring
virtuoso, Busoni nevertheless enjoyed a cult status that led to an
extensive literature, much of it mostly introductory in nature. He made a
lasting impact on composers like Kaikhosru Shapurji Sorabji and Ronald
Stevenson, among others, who championed his music and extended his heritage
in their own works. It is mostly since the 1980s that his significance,
both as a transition figure between the nineteenth and twentieth centuries
and as a prophetic personality in the history of modern music (as seen in
his Entwurf einer neuen sthetik der Tonkunst), is being increasingly
reassessed, as shown in editions of writings and letters, academic
publications, and scholarly articles. New editions of several of his early
works have also been published during the last two decades, and recordings
and concert performances have become quite frequent.

Works and style

Few of Busonis works written before the late 1890s (especially those
written during childhood) are known through publication and recording; in
1905 he considered the SONATA IN E MINOR FOR VIOLIN AND PIANO [no. 2], BV
244 (1898), to be his opus 1. THE SONATA IN F MINOR, BV 164 (1880), written
in the shadow of Brahms, and the 24 Preludes, BV 181 (1881), indebted to
Schumann and Chopin, appear as the culmination of his early years. It is
with the seventy-minute Concerto for Piano, Orchestra, and Male Chorus, BV
247 (1904), that he concluded his career in the late Romantic style. The
ELEGIES, BV 249 (1907-8), written at a time when he championed recent music
in concerts that he sponsored in Berlin (featuring, among others, Debussy,
Bartk, and Sibelius), show him crossing the boundary over to modern music;
this was just after he had laid down in writing his forward-looking ideas
about the extension of musical means. His life-long preoccupation with the
music of Bach, seen previously in his edition of Book1 of the WELL-
TEMPERED CLAVIER and his transcriptions of well-known organ works and the
Chaconne for violin, is found in the FANTASIA CONTRAPPUNTISTICA, BV 256
(1910), which realizes the unfinished fugue from Bachs ART OF FUGUE as
part of a massive contrapuntal structure in modern style. Transcription and
composition were always intimately intertwined in Busonis music; for him,
every notation was the transcription of an abstract idea, and a works
performance was also a transcription. After turning to a dissonant,
experimental, style in the Sonatina seconda, BV 259 (1912), and the
NOCTURNE SYMPHONIQUE, BV 262 (1912), he changed in 1915 to a much simpler
style resulting from his new ideal of a Young Classicism. By this he
meant the mastery, the sifting and the turning into account of all the
gains of previous experiments and their inclusion in strong and beautiful
forms. He longed for a return to melody ... as the ruler of all voices
and emotions and called for a rejection of subjectivity and the re-
conquest of serenity. From 1916 onwards he was mostly preoccupied with his
opera DOKTOR FAUST, a synthesis of his mature compositions reworking
passages from more than two dozen works dating back to 1912. Left
incomplete at the composers death, this rarely performed but highly
admired work it received its first performance in Dresden in 1925, in a
completion by his disciple Philip Jarnach (two recent completions, by
Antony Beaumont and Larry Sitsky, respectively, also exist).

List of works

The thematic catalogue by Kindermann has numbers for 303 original works and
115 transcriptions (the numbers given below do not match these figures for
various reasons having to do in part with multiple versions). The original
works consist of stage works (5; including DOKTOR FAUST), orchestra (22;
including BERCEUSE LGIAQUE, TURANDOT SUITE, and ROND ARLECCHINESCO),
piano and orchestra (14; including the CONCERTO FOR PIANO, ORCHESTRA, AND
MALE CHORUS), voice(s) and orchestra or instrumental ensemble (20), chorus
without accompaniment (18), chorus and instruments or orchestra (6),
chamber ensemble, (43; including the Sonata in E minor for Violin and Piano
[no. 2]), piano (149; including ELEGIES, FANTASY AFTER JOHANN SEBASTIAN
BACH, AN DIE JUGEND, FANTASIA CONTRAPPUNTISTICA, INDIAN DIARY, six
Sonatinas, and TOCCATA: PRELUDIO, FANTASIA, CIACONNA), piano four hands
(4), two pianos (5; including the IMPROVISATION ON THE BACH CHORALE WIE
WOHL IST MIR, O FREUND DER SEELE), organ (2), voice and piano (42),
unspecified medium (6). The cadenzas, transcriptions, and editions divide
into orchestra (5), solo instruments and orchestra (25), chamber ensemble
(7), piano solo (80; including cadenzas for piano concertos by Mozart and
arrangements of organ works by Bach), two pianos (10), voice and piano (1),
unspecified medium (1). Many original works and transcriptions are
available online on IMSLP/Petrucci Music Library.

References and further reading

Beaumont, Antony (1985) Busoni the Composer, Bloomington: Indiana
University Press; London: Faber & Faber. (The first and most thorough book
devoted to Busonis works written from 1890 onwards, but excluding the
transcriptions, editions, and cadenzas.)

Couling, Della (2005) Ferruccio Busoni: A Musical Ishmael, Lanham, MD,
Toronto, and Oxford: Scarecrow Press. (The most recent biography, based in
part on the extensive collection of letters at the Staatsbibliothek zu
Berlin.)

Dent, Edward J. (1933) Ferruccio Busoni: A Biography, London: Oxford
University Press. Repr. eds. London: Oxford University Press, 1966; London:
Ernst Eulenburg, 1974; New York: Da Capo Press, 1982. (The most widely
cited biography, by a major English musicologist who was a member of his
circle.)

Kindermann, Jrgen (1980) Thematisch-chronologisches Verzeichnis der
musikalischen Werke von Ferruccio B. Busoni, Studien zur Musikgeschichte
des 19. Jahrhunderts, vol. 19, Regensburg: Gustav Bosse Verlag. (Scholarly
catalogue of Busonis works, listed chronologically by date of publication,
and of transcriptions, listed by composer. Works are referred to with the
abbreviation Kind. or with BV, which is used by Roberge (1991) with the
same numbering.)

Roberge, Marc-Andr (1991) Ferruccio Busoni: A Bio-Bibliography, Bio-
Bibliographies in Music, no. 34, New York, Westport, Conn., and London:
Greenwood Press. (Reference work of 400 pages comprising a detailed
catalogue of works, transcriptions, and cadenzas; a comprehensive
discography; and an annotated bibliography of 1,325 titles.)

Roberge, Marc-Andr (2002) Ferruccio Busoni, in Music of the Twentieth-
Century Avant-Garde: A Biocritical Sourcebook, ed. Larry Sitsky, 85-90, New
York, Westport, Conn., and London: Greenwood Press. (Biographical sketch,
followed by a presentation of Busoni as an avant-garde personality and
composer.)

Sitsky, Larry (2009) Busoni and the Piano: The Works, the Writings, and the
Recordings, 2nd ed. Distinguished Reprints, no. 3, Hillsdale, NY: Pendragon
Press. (Presentation and analysis of Busonis original works and
transcriptions for the piano, including concertos.)



