
BUTTS, MARY (1890  1937)
Nina Ennemark

Mary Butts was a well-known and prolific novelist, essayist, poet and
writer of short stories in her time. First published by ROBERT MCALMON,
Butts was acquainted with and admired by a host of familiar modernist
figures, such as ERNEST HEMINGWAY, JEAN COCTEAU, HILDA DOOLITTLE, EZRA
POUND, MARIANNE MOORE, DJUNA BARNES, and married for many years to the
important publisher of modernist writing JOHN RODKER. Despite her
prominence on the scene of modernist writing, and being published in
leading modernist journals such as the Dial, the Little Review and the
Transatlantic Review, she was largely forgotten after her death until her
rediscovery in the early 1990s.

Notorious for her flamboyant and bohemian lifestyle, Butts was a socialist
and pacifist during the war, intently engaging with the modern cultural
landscape of her day marked by psychoanalysis, quantum physics, primitivism
and, crucially, the trauma caused by the conflict. At the same time, her
work is marked by a tension between the old and modern world. Butts
developed a love of classical mythology in early childhood, which deepened
in adolescence as she became profoundly influenced by the writings of the
classicist JANE ELLEN HARRISON, who celebrated ritual as the forgotten
origin of art and religion, and ancient matriarchal cults and goddesses.
This led to a greater interest in anthropology for Butts and its extensive
use in her writing. Her work explores the bewilderment felt in response to
changes wrought by the technological and scientific progress of modernity.
It seeks both to give voice to and counteract the typical rootlessness of
the period by showing continuity with the past through a revival of a link
with the primitive and also through the use of classical allusions and
fairy tales.

Buttss use of allegory and symbolism is also an attempt to convey mystical
experience inexpressible through realist modes. There is a quest in her
work for 'a fresh spiritual adventure [] a re-statement & a development
of our old experience in the field which gave us our religions" (Journals
341). Buttss spiritual quest takes the form of a mystical, pagan
relationship to place and nature, which is sometimes expressed in
xenophobic, even racial supremacist language regarding her native England.
Her mysticism led her to explore occultist practices, including studying
magic with Aleister Crowley  an experience which deepened her involvement
with opium and other substances, eventually leading to her untimely death.





List of works:

Novels:

Ashe of Rings (1925)

Armed with Madness (1928)

Death of Felicity Taverner (1932)

Short stories:

Speed the Plough and Other Stories (1923)

From Altar to Chimney-piece (1992)

Several Occasions (1932)

With and Without Buttons and Other Stories (1991)

Last Stories (1938)

Historical novels:

The Macedonian (1933)

Scenes from the Life of Cleopatra (1935)

Autobiography:

The Crystal Cabinet: My Childhood at Salterns (1937)

Journals:

The Journals of Mary Butts. Ed. Nathalie Blondel. New Haven: Yale
University Press, 2002.

References and further reading:

Blondel, Nathalie. Mary Butts: Scenes from the Life. New York: McPherson,
1992.

Foy, Roslyn Reso. Ritual, Myth and Mysticism in the Work of Mary Butts:
Between Feminism and Modernism. Arkansas: The University of Arkansas Press,
2000.

Radford, Andrew. Excavating a Secret History: Mary Butts and the Return of
the Nativist. Connotations 17:1 (2007/08): 14-28.



