
Camden Town Group, the (1911  1912)

Founded in 1911 and active in London before the First World War, the
sixteen members of the Camden Town Group played an important role in
developing a distinctively modern British visual art. They promoted modern
art's engagement with a modern world and, in particular, with the minutiae
of everyday urban life across a range of characteristic subjects. The
subjects of their art include views of street corners, portraits of local
girls, shabby bedsit rooms as well as theatre and music hall interiors as
represented, for example, in Spencer Gore's The Balcony at the Alhambra
(c.1911-12). The group held only three official exhibitions between June
1911 and December 1912, all at the Carfax Gallery, London. However, the
group's members participated in a great many more contemporaneous events
and displays which contributed to the burgeoning British post-impressionist
art scene.

In style, the group was loosely connected by an engagement with the methods
of the French Impressionists and, for certain members, with the more
adventurous techniques of their forebears including Paul Gauguin, Vincent
Van Gogh and Paul Czanne. Many members would go on to develop their own,
more individual styles of post-impressionism as members of the longer
lasting Fitzroy Street Group and London Group. Nevertheless, for the brief
period during which they operated under the Camden Town Group moniker, they
were united stylistically by the thick encrustations of colour, which they
applied in broken touches to their mostly small canvases.

The Group evolved from the casual acquaintances of artists in the first
decade of the Twentieth century, and was centred around the artist and
writer Walter Sickert. Following informal meetings at Sickert's studios and
accommodation the group rented studio space at the same address, 19 Fitzroy
Street, London, where members displayed and discussed each others works.
Such can observed in Malcolm Drummond's painting 19 Fitzroy Street
(c.191214).

Before the infamous Manet and the Post-Impressionists exhibition organised
by Roger Fry at the Grafton Gallery in 1910-11, British art had remained
relatively untouched by the more advanced abstract art emerging in Europe.
While future Camden Town Group members such as Harold Gilman, Charles
Ginner and Gore were aware of certain progressive currents and leading
lights, this exhibition provided an opportunity for the close examination
of works by the likes of Van Gogh, Gauguin, and Czanne and proved a
catalyst for British artists to self-organise more innovative exhibitions.

Ginner, who settled in London in 1910, was instrumental in introducing the
modern urban landscape into the repertoire of his Camden Town Group
colleagues. Ginner's brightly coloured and tightly cropped view of the
traffic island at Piccadilly Circus (1912) captures the bustling street
life at the heart of the urban metropolis and demonstrates the group's
concern with the clash of tradition and modernity wherein 'coster' girls
sell flowers in the midst of passing vehicles bedecked with signage
advertising the latest theatrical entertainments.

The output of the group's artists is not, however, blindly reverential or
awestruck by the pleasures of the metropolis. Many of their works,
especially those of quiet urban interiors, bespeak the alienation often
associated with modern city dwelling. The cropped and shallow pictorial
space of Walter Sickert's What Shall We Do About the Rent? (c.1908), for
example, evokes subjects including prostitution, debt and controversial
allusions to a series of murders committed in the Camden Town area at the
time. Only a few of the group's artists regularly created nude studies,
Sickert being one of them. It is likely due to Sickert's importance in the
history of the group and his lasting renown that many commentaries
overstate the groups association with this subject.

The paintings of Gore and Gilman may best represent the style of the Camden
Town Group; they offer a middle ground that falls between the group's
celebration of the urban environment, and the despair depicted at the hands
of the city. Sickert, seeking to urge British painters away from the
tasteful aestheticism of the late nineteenth century, famously stated in
1910:
The more our art is serious, the more will it tend to avoid the drawing-
room and stick to the kitchen. The plastic arts are gross arts, dealing
joyously with gross material facts [] and while they will flourish in the
scullery, or on the dunghill, they fade at a breath from the drawing-room.'
Paintings such as Gore's The Gas Cooker (1913) and The Shopping List (1912)
by Gilman, present intimate and unglamorous domestic interiors following
Sickerts directive. In Gores and Gilmans respective paintings, vibrant
harmonies of flat colour elevate the everyday items depicted to the status
of devotional objects, while the figures quietly and determinately go about
their daily tasks.

The Group held no further exhibitions after 1912 and its members gradually
formed alternative organisations. Members of the Camden Town Group merged
with outlying members of the Fitzroy Street Group to create the long
lasting London Group, and later, between 1914-15, the so-called Neo-Realist
artists, Ginner, Gilman and Robert Bevan formed the Cumberland Market
Group. The Camden Town Group's brief but highly productive existence had
fulfilled Sickert's desire to foster and embolden a younger generation of
British artists whose works accurately recorded their modern experience.
Its core members were not interested in pushing abstraction to extremes,
but their determination and group organisation afforded them the space to
experiment with modernist techniques while creating honest visual documents
without recourse to pictorial artifice.

List of Members:
Walter Bayes, Robert Bevan, Harold Gilman, Charles Ginner, Spencer
Frederick Gore, Duncan Grant (following Doman Turner's death in September
1911), James Dickson Innes, Augustus John, Henry Lamb, Wyndham Lewis,
Maxwell Gordon Lightfoot, James Bolivar Manson, Lucien Pissarro (the son of
French Impressionist painter Camille Pissarro), William Ratcliffe, Walter
Sickert, John Doman Turner.


References and Further Reading
Baron, W. (2000) Perfect moderns: a history of the Camden Town Group,
London: Ashgate.

Upstone, R. (ed.) (2008) Modern Painters: The Camden Town Group, exh. cat.
London: Tate Publishing.

Bonett, H., Holt, Y., Mundy, J. (eds.) (2012), The Camden Town Group in
Context, http://www.tate.org.uk/art/research-publications/camden-town-
group, accessed 25 March 2014.

Peters Corbett, D. (2004) Walter Sickert: Surface and Modernity and The
Aesthetics of Materiality: English Modernism before 1914, The World in
Paint: Modern Art and Visuality in England, 18481914, Manchester:
Manchester University Press: 169261.

Suggested Images:
Spencer Gore, The Balcony at the Alhambra, c.191112, Oil on canvas, 48.5 x
35.5 cm, York Museums Trust, York Art Gallery

Malcolm Drummond, 19 Fitzroy Street, c.191214, Oil on canvas, 71 x 50.8
cm, Laing Art Gallery, Newcastle upon Tyne

Charles Ginner, Picadilly Circus, 1912, Oil on canvas, Tate Gaellery,
London

Walter Sickert, What Shall We Do About the Rent?, c.1908, Oil on canvas,
25.6 x 35.5 cm, Yale Centre for British Art, New Haven

Harold Gilman, The Shopping List, 1912, Oil on canvas, 61.5 x 51 cm,
British Council Collection
