
Can Due , penname of Deng Xiaohua   (1953 )

One of Chinas most experimental novelists of the post-Mao era, Can Xue has
also been one of the most polarizing. While some critics, including the
late Susan Sontag, were mesmerized by her surrealist and absurdist tales,
others have dismissed her fiction as hysterical and unreadable.
Literally translated as Leftover Snow Refusing to Melt, Can Xues penname
bespeaks the defiance with which she has answered her critics: If a reader
feels that this book is unreadable, she said in an interview following the
publication of a translation of her novel Five Spice Street (2009), then
its clear that he is not one of my readers.
(http://www.pri.org/theworld/?q=node/26132). Resisting compartmentalization
as a feminist writer or interpretations of her often nightmarish tales as
straightforward literary responses to the violence and political excesses
of the Mao period, Can Xue imperatively denied that her work is rooted in
Chinas socio-historic condition. There is no political cause in my work,
she said in an interview in 2002, maintaining instead that hers is a
literature of the soul and that its main interest lies in the
metaphysical aspect of individual existence.
(http://mclc.osu.edu/rc/pubs/mccandlish.htm)



Even though Can Xue does not want her work to be viewed as social
commentary, it is hard to imagine that external realities have not had an
impact on her literary imagination. Born into a family of intellectuals,
Can Xue witnessed how her parents fell victim to various political
campaigns aimed at exposing alleged counter-revolutionaries during the
first decades of the Peoples Republic of China. These arbitrary and at
times extremely violent events, which culminated in the Cultural Revolution
(1966-1976), often defied rational explanation and lent themselves to
absurdist artistic responses. In  Hut on the Mountain (, 1985),
one of Can Xues first published short stories, a surrealist nightmare
unfolds in which the un-gendered narrator becomes increasingly alienated
from his or her family and surroundings. In the novella Yellow Mud Street
(1987), the nightmares of an entire community living among garbage and
excrement unfolds as a mysterious entity of indefinable origin comes to
haunt everyones lives. Retroactively deemed anti-government, the work
was banned by authorities in 2001, along with Can Xues autobiographical
essay A Summer Day in the Beautiful South, a tribute to her grandmother
who died from malnourishment during Chinas great famine.


Most of Can Xues fiction defies temporal and spatial orientation and
explores alienation, solitude, anxiety and at times the comfort and warmth
found in interpersonal relations through dreams, hallucinations, or other
subjective experiences. This lends her oeuvre the universality that may
also be found in the works of other 20th century modernists who
experimented with dreamscapes, such as Franz Kafka or Jorge Luis Borges,
two writers Can Xue names as important influences on her work. Other
writers who exerted influence on her were Italo Calvino, Goethe,
Shakespeare or Dante, all of whom she discussed in a number of collections
of literary criticism such as her Revenge Through Art: Can Xues Notes on
Literature (2003).

Search for identity and exploration of self characterize much of Can Xues
fiction. In Five Spice Street (2002), her fist full-length novel, an entire
neighborhood becomes obsessed with the secrets surrounding a mysterious
Madam X, her husband and son, as well as her lover Mr. Q. Grotesque
interpersonal relations are another recurring theme in in Can Xues oeuvre.
In My Brother (, 1997), the narrator travels to the Western deserts
of China to reconnect with a lost bother, and in Mother Rat (2003), the
narrator comes to live in the house of his brother, where he becomes
obsessed with a rat while growing alienated from his family. Can Xues
fiction rarely offers narrative closure. It probes into ever new levels of
absurdity of human existence, suggesting that the only meaning that is
possible in life is a permanent expansion of metaphysical spheres.
Subjective experience in Can Xues fiction becomes the only authentic and
accessible truth. Only such writing, Can Xue claims, can truly create
something new, and evoke a response from the depth of human emotions.





Selected Bibliography:

Studies of Can Xue:

Cai, Rong (2004) The Subject in Crisis in Contemporary Chinese Literature,
Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press. (Contains chapter on Can Xue in
which author draws on Jean-Paul Satre to read existentialist anxiety in Can
Xues fiction as a commentary on life in post-revolutionary China)

Lu, Tonglin (1995) Misogyny, Cultural Nihilism, and Oppositional Politics:
Contemporary Chinese Experimental Politics, Stanford: Stanford University
Press. (Contains chapter on Can Xue that illustrates how her experimental
fiction mocks masculine monopolization and misogynism of literary language
in China)

Works in English Translation:

DIALOGUES IN PARADISE (1989) (Contains A Summer Day in the Beautiful
South and Hut on the Mountain)

OLD FLOATING CLOUD (1991) (Contains Yellow Mud Street)

The Embroidered Shoes (1997)

BLUE LIGHT IN THE SKY (2006) (Contains My Brother)

FIVE SPICE STREET (2009)

Short Stories & Novels:

YELLOW MUD STREET (, 1987)

Dialogues in Paradise (, 1988)

MY BROTHER (, 1997)

FIVE SPICE STREET (, 2002)

MOTHER RAT (, 2003)

A Never-Described Dreamscape: The Complete Short Stories of Can Xue
(: , 2004)

Miss L Fangshi (, 2011)

Essays & Critcisim:

REVENGE THROUGH ART: CAN XUES NOTES ON LITERATURE (: ,
2003)

Interviews & Resources Online:

Stubbornly Illuminating the Dirty Snow that Refuses to Melt: A
Conversation with Can Xue. MCLC Resources Center, 2002.
http://mclc.osu.edu/rc/pubs/mccandlish.htm

Modern Mystery Street." Interview by Bill Marx. PRI's The World. PRI, 14
Apr. 2009.
http://www.pri.org/theworld/?q=node/26132

Can Xue. MITs Contemporary Chinese Writers Website Project. Includes
video footage of Can Xue.
http://web.mit.edu/ccw/can-xue/




-----------------------
[pic]

[pic]

[pic]

[pic]


