Taylor & Francis – Encyclopedia of Modernism



About you

[Salutation]

Murat

[Middle name]

Akser



[Enter your biography]



Kadir Has University, Turkey



Your article

Cassavetes, John (1929-1989)

[Enter any variant forms of your headword – OPTIONAL]

John Nicholas Cassavetes (1929-1989) was born to Greek parents in New York City, John Cassavetes originally trained in the theater. His acting in commercial Hollywood films such as The Dirty Dozen (1967) and Rosemary’s Baby (1968), for which he received an Academy Award nomination, gave him some mainstream popularity and the means to finance his own independent projects. These were characterized by a realistic, pseudo-documentary style, loose storylines centered on quirky characters, and a strong reliance on actors’ performances. He is considered one of the pioneers of American independent cinema.

John Nicholas Cassavetes (1929-1989) was born to Greek parents in New York City, John Cassavetes originally trained in the theater. His acting in commercial Hollywood films such as The Dirty Dozen (1967) and Rosemary’s Baby (1968), for which he received an Academy Award nomination, gave him some mainstream popularity and the means to finance his own independent projects. These were characterized by a realistic, pseudo-documentary style, loose storylines centered on quirky characters, and a strong reliance on actors’ performances. He is considered one of the pioneers of American independent cinema.



Cassavetes combined work as a Hollywood actor with a distinguished career as an independent director in complete control of his films. He had been a frequent television actor since as early as 1951. Between 1959-60, he was the male lead in the successful television series Johnny Staccato, a role that gave him the financial stability to make his first independent feature film, Shadows (1959). The film is shot cinema verité style. The realistic, often ad-libbed, performances, the high-contrast black and white cinematography, and the creative use of location sound are trademarks of American indie film to this day. Along with Pull My Daisy (Robert Frank and Alfred Leslie, 1959), Shadows is credited with triggering off the New American Cinema movement of the early to mid-1960s.   



His second successful independent feature, Faces (1968), granted Cassavetes an Academy Award nomination for best screenplay. Cassavetes tended to work with a stable cast, which included his wife Gena Rowlands, Peter Falk, Ben Gazarra, Seymour Cassell, and Timothy Carey. A Woman Under the Influence (1974) is often considered Cassavetes’ masterpiece; with Gena Rowlands and Peter Falk as a suburban couple, it provides a dark picture of middle-class life in 1970s America. The film earned Cassavetes yet another nomination for best director and Gena Rowlands her first nomination for best actress. The Killing of a Chinese Bookie was also a success with Ben Gazarra in the lead. The self-reflexive Opening Night (1977) told the story of a theater troupe in rehearsal for a play soon to open; the relationships between the actors on and off the stage intersect and become confused and the viewer is prompted to choose about the “reality” of the events on the screen. A multi-layered reflection on narrative and on the relations between representation and the real, Opening Night is one of Cassavetes’ most complex films. 



Cassavetes kept on working as an actor through the 1980s, a decade in which he directed three films with more conventional narrative structures. Gloria (1980) is the story of a woman who had to take up arms to raise her child. Love Streams (1984) and Big Trouble (1986) are carefully crafted chamber pieces that in many ways lack the vigor of his earlier work. 



Filmography as Director



Shadows (1959)

Faces (1968)

Husbands (1970)

Minnie and Moskowitz (1971)

A Woman Under the Influence (1974)

The Killing of a Chinese Bookie (1976)

Opening Night (1977)

Gloria (1980)

Love Streams (1984)

Big Trouble (1986) 



Further reading:

 (Carney, Cassavetes on Cassavetes)

(Carney, The Films of John Cassavetes: Pragmatism, Modernism, and the Movies)

(Cassavetes)

(Fine)

(Kouvaros)