Taylor & Francis – Encyclopedia of Modernism



About you

[Salutation]

Lisa

[Middle name]

Weihman



[Enter your biography]



West Virginia University



Your article

Celtic Revival

[Enter any variant forms of your headword – OPTIONAL]

The Celtic Revival was a late nineteenth century resurgence of interest in Celtic history, languages and myth that crossed through many disciplines, most notably cultural anthropology, art history and literature. The Celtic Revival was most influential in Ireland, where it inspired the formation of the Gaelic Athletic Association (GAA; Cumann Lúthchleas Gael) in 1884, dedicated to the recovery of ancient Irish sports. In 1893, Douglas Hyde helped to establish the Gaelic League (Conradh na Gaeilge) in order to preserve the Irish language and promote Irish culture. The Celtic Revival is also associated with the Irish Literary Revival. The ‘Celtic Twilight’, borrowed from the title of William Butler Yeats’s 1893 volume, is an alternate reference to this renaissance of Irish literature and poetry in the late eighteenth and early twentieth century. Inspired by the poetry of Thomas Moore, James Clarence Mangan, Samuel Ferguson and others, as well as the folktales published by Standish James O’Grady, Yeats established both the Irish Literary Society in London and the National Literary Society in Dublin in 1892. In 1899, Yeats established the Irish Literary Theatre, which would become the Irish National Theatre Society at the Abbey Theatre in Dublin in 1904.

The Celtic Revival was a late nineteenth century resurgence of interest in Celtic history, languages and myth that crossed through many disciplines, most notably cultural anthropology, art history and literature. The Celtic Revival was most influential in Ireland, where it inspired the formation of the Gaelic Athletic Association (GAA; Cumann Lúthchleas Gael) in 1884, dedicated to the recovery of ancient Irish sports. In 1893, Douglas Hyde helped to establish the Gaelic League (Conradh na Gaeilge) in order to preserve the Irish language and promote Irish culture. The Celtic Revival is also associated with the Irish Literary Revival. The ‘Celtic Twilight’, borrowed from the title of William Butler Yeats’s 1893 volume, is an alternate reference to this renaissance of Irish literature and poetry in the late eighteenth and early twentieth century. Inspired by the poetry of Thomas Moore, James Clarence Mangan, Samuel Ferguson and others, as well as the folktales published by Standish James O’Grady, Yeats established both the Irish Literary Society in London and the National Literary Society in Dublin in 1892. In 1899, Yeats established the Irish Literary Theatre, which would become the Irish National Theatre Society at the Abbey Theatre in Dublin in 1904. Authors associated with the Abbey include Lady Augusta Gregory, Edward Martyn, George Russell (‘AE’) and John Millington Synge, whose controversial Playboy of the Western World provoked a riot in 1907. The Celtic Revival inspired both cultural and political nationalism, offering Ireland a heroic past and rich cultural heritage upon which to base its bid for political independence in the twentieth century.

Further reading:

 (Castle)

(Cronin, Murphy and Rouse)

(Culleton and McGarrity)

(Deane)

(Synge)

(Gregory)

(Matthews)

(McMahon)

(Watson)

(Yeats)

(Yeats, Collected Works)

(Young)