
Celtic Twilight, The (1893; revised 1902)
      The Celtic Twilight is a collection of folk tales gathered by William
Butler Yeats (1865-1939; frontispiece portrait of W. B. Yeats in The Celtic
Twilight by J. B. Yeats: http://www.celtic-
twilight.com/ireland/yeats/celtic_twilight/yeats.jpg) during his interviews
with rural working people in western Ireland. These tales feature larger-
than-life Irish personalities, Celtic mythological figures, eerie
landscapes, strange beasts, theurgic cults, haunted houses, ghosts, and
faeries (or the Sidhe). The Celtic Twilight has since become an important
document of Irish national culture. Tim Wenzell has observed that from an
existence almost entirely devoid of the material [of a written history], it
becomes necessary for the poor people of Ireland to defer to their
imaginations to fashion one (21). As surely as the rural people of Ireland
continued to imagine and invent a cultural history, so too did Yeats. The
Celtic Twilight can be seen as a Yeatsian antithetical cultural history
(see A Vision), an invented history relying as much upon creative vision as
it does upon established facts or academic rigour. As Kathleen Raine
explains in her introduction to the 1981 Smythe release of The Celtic
Twilight, the imagination of the people transmutes fact into legend; and
that legend, recorded in The Celtic Twilight just as Yeats heard it, he
raised to a greater grandeur in The Tower (21). Indeed, the invention of
legend and myth, whether Celtic or personal, fascinated Yeats right up to
the end of his life.
      First published in 1893 (Bullen), The Celtic Twilight was revisited by
Yeats in 1902. In his typical revisionary fashion, Yeats would subsequently
declare in the 1925 prefatorial note to Mythologies, which contains the
updated version of The Celtic Twilight along with other works mostly from
the 1890s, that his earlier versions were as first published, written in
that artificial, elaborate English so many of us played with in the
[eighteen] nineties, and I had come to hate them (i). That artificial,
elaborate English to which Yeats refers is the Kiltartanese dialect,
which, as Raine puts it, had been much decried by the critics (8). Along
with improving his diction and removing a critical essay, The Four Winds
of Desire, Yeats added many new stories, most of which were of a better
quality than any in the first version (7-8).
      The Celtic Twilight followed earlier works exploring similar subject
matter. These works include Fairy and Folk Tale of the Irish Peasantry
(1888), Representative Irish Tales (1891), and Irish Fairy Tales (1892),
which Raine characterizes as having involved much reading and were more or
less hack work undertaken for money (7). Raine sharply distinguishes these
works from The Celtic Twilight, however, for its genesis not from books,
but from life; memories of things heard, seen, and felt in his native
county Sligo, the home of his family (7). As Robert Welch and Bruce
Stewart point out in The Oxford Companion to Irish Literature, Yeats
mythologized real-life figures that he knew, including George Russell (or
), Lucy Middleton, Mary Battle, and Katherine Tynans father in addition
to documenting various supernatural phenomena said to have occurred in
Ireland  (Celtic Twilight, The 92). Welch and Stewart further claim that
these supernatural stories convey Yeatss belief in the otherworld given
his avoidance of argument or speculation regarding these strange
happenings (Welch and Stewart 92). The extent to which Yeats believed in
occult or other supernatural phenomena has spurred much debate within the
scholarly and critical discourse of Yeatss oeuvre as a whole.
References and Further Reading

Finneran, Richard J., ed. (1996) The Collected Poems of W. B. Yeats, New
       York: Scribner.
Foster, Robert Fitzroy. (1997-2003) W. B. Yeats: A Life. Vols. I-II. New
       York: Oxford U P.
Raine, Kathleen. (1981) Introduction. The Celtic Twilight. By W. B.
       Yeats. Illust. Jean Townsend. Gerrards Cross: Colin Smythe.
Welch, Robert, and Bruce Stewart, eds. (1996) Celtic Twilight, The. The
       Oxford Companion to Irish Literature, Oxford: Clarendon.
Wenzell, Tim. (2007) Yeats and the Celtic Twilight: Between the Worlds,
       Yeats Eliot Review 24 (3): 20-23.
Yeats, William Butler. (1988) Mythologies, New York: Touchstone.
Yeats, William Butler. (1962) A Vision, London: Macmillan.



