
Cinema Nvo
Peter Baker (Texas A & M University)

Cinema Nvo (in English, New Cinema) was a Brazilian film movement which
emerged in the late 1950s and was highly active throughout the1960s and
early 70s. Its principal concern was the development of a national cinema:
a cinema that reflected Brazils national character while having a
universal value, produced by an indigenous industry. The movement was
rooted in three events: first, the collapse of the Vera Cruz studio, the
Brazilian Hollywood of the 1950s, an event which dashed hopes for a strong
national film industry; second, the neorealist cinema of Nelson Pereira dos
Santos, whose Rio: 40 graus [Rio 100 Degrees Farenheit, 1955] was an
important predecessor of the movement, and third, a new generation of young
cinema critics  greatly inspired by the former two factors  who advocated
the aesthetics of Italian neorealism, Eisensteinian montage, French New
Wave auteur theory, and the estrangement of the Brechtian theatre. The
movement is generally separated into four distinct periods: the favela film
cycle (195560), the serto film cycle (196164), the city power film
cycle (196468), and tropicalism (196872). Each of these periods is
defined by intense filmic production and strong theoretical reflection.
Glauber Rocha is generally identified as the leader and most influential
director of the movement.

The favela film cycle was initiated by Nelson Pereira dos Santos in 1955,
with the release of Rio 100 Degrees Farenheit. The favelas were the large
city slums that surrounded Brazils larger cities, and Pereira dos Santos
was the first filmmaker to use a neorealist approach to document life in
these neighbourhoods. The film immediately received critical acclaim from
young Brazilian critics who regarded it as groundbreaking and capable of
generating a type of cinema in tune with the reality of Brazilian life. The
release sparked a heated debate on the possibilities for a future national
cinema. These intellectual discussions circulated in contemporary
periodicals (such as Jornal do Bahia and Revista Civilizao Brasileira) in
both Bahia and Rio de Janeiro. Under Pereira dos Santoss influence, these
critics saw new possibilities for filmic expression and (often
revolutionary) social change in their country  much like French film
writers such as Truffaut and Godard. Writers such as Glauber Rocha, Alex
Viany, and Rui Guerra began to produce their own films; early examples
include Ptio (Rocha, 1959) and Os Cafajestes (Guerra, 1962).

It was not until the serto film cycle that cinema nvo came into its own
as a defined movement. This was largely due to the work of Glauber Rocha,
whose prolific writing during these years earned him recognition as the
unchallenged leader of the movement. Between 1960 and 1964, he wrote in
many journals about the most important experimental cinema of the time, as
well as on the future of Brazilian cinema, which had to break free from its
colonized cinematographic language. These thoughts culminated in his most
famous theoretical work, Esttica da Fome [An Aesthetic of Hunger, 1965].
Around these discussions there emerged a group of director-intellectuals
who, despite their differences, shared in the project of a new domestic
cinema. This moment of the film cycle receives its name from the
northeastern serto region of the Bahia, whose social problems were the
object of many of the films produced. Rochas first feature film,
Barravento [The Turning Wind, 1962], can be included at the beginning of
this phase, which is once again properly initiated by Pereira dos Santoss
Vidas Secas [Barren Lives, 1963]. It also includes films by Rui Guerra (Os
Fuzis, a.k.a The Guns, 1963), Leon Hirsman, Carlos Diegues, and others. The
greatest achievement of this phase is Rochas Deu e o Diabo na Terra do Sol
[Black God, White Devil, 1964], which breaks with the neorealism that had
until then defined the new cinemas aesthetic, opening it up to magical-
realist and poetic elements.

However, 1964 was also the year of a military coup in Brazil, which brought
an end to this moment of cultural freedom and expansion, undermining the
real possibilities for a new Brazilian cinema at its very inception. This
did not deter filmmakers, and the city power cycle dealt with social
inequalities in the Brazilian metropolises. The censorship and repression
of the military regime, however, impelled filmmakers towards allegory and
indirection, forcing many directors to modify their earlier aesthetics and
incorporate different influencessuch as Dada, surrealism, and the work of
Godard. Rochas Terra em transe [Entranced Earth, 1966] and Pereira dos
Santoss Fome de amor [Hunger for Love, 1968] are among the defining films
of this period.

In the final phase of the movement, the tropicalist phase, the cinema
nvo ceased being defined by reference to any particular European
aesthetic. General characteristics for this phase are difficult to outline,
but include a mixture of direct and fictionalized cinema. Joaquim Pedro de
Andrades Macunaima (1969) and Glauber Rochas O Drago da Maldade contra o
Santo Guerreiro [Antnio das Mortes, 1968] are representative of this phase
of production. While this final phase of cinema nvo contained a moment of
pride, since postcolonial nationsand Brazil in particularhad developed an
autonomous aesthetic independent from European and North American models,
it was also a moment of unprecedented repression and censorship. By 1972,
many cinema nvo directors had fled into exile.

A cinema of socialist and anticolonial revolutionary spirit that brought
together innovative form and socio-political revolution, the cinema novo
was an important development for the modernist avant garde in Latin
America, Africa, and Asia, and set a crucial precedent for what later
became known as Third Cinemas.

References and Further Reading
Dennison, Stephanie and Lisa Shaw (ed.) (2004) Popular cinema in Brazil
1930  2001. Manchester: Manchester University Press. (A more comprehensive
guide to Brazilian film history, beginning with an analysis of the more
popular forms of the 30s and 40s and continuing through the cinema novo
movement into the 90s).

Hollyman, Burnes S. P.(1983). Glauber Rocha and the Cinema Nvo: A Study
of His Critical Writings and Films. New York: Garland Pub. (One of the few
full length works available in English on Rochas filmic production.
Includes a chapter with a general overview of cinema nvos various
phases).

Johnson, Randal and Robert Stam (ed.) (1995). Brazilian Cinema. New York:
Colombia University Press. (An edited collection of theoretical writings
from the most important Brazilian director, including but not limited to
the cinema nvo directors. Includes the famous essay by Glauber Rocha An
Esthetic of Hunger).

Johnson, Randal. (1984)Cinema Novo X 5: Masters of Contemporary Brazilian
Film. Austin, Texas: University of Texas Press. (A good introduction to the
movement that contextualizes cinema nvo in terms of Brazilian politics of
the time. Presents the work of five of the most important directors of the
movement, dedicating a chapter to each).
