

CIRCLE


Circle was a book, published in London in 1937, as a survey of
international constructive art. The joint editors, and organisers of the
parallel Exhibition of Constructive Art, were the migr Russian
sculptor Naum Gabo (1890  1977), the British abstract artist Ben Nicholson
and the modernist British architect, Leslie Martin. Gabo was one of several
European artists and architects who came to England in the late 1930s to
escape Nazi and Soviet oppression. In London, he became a friend of Ben
Nicholson with whom he discussed starting an annual publication promoting
the constructivist concept of a synthesis of modernist architecture and
constructivist painting and sculpture. Circle was the outcome of these
discussions, and the book and exhibition constituted the first
comprehensive exposition of constructive art in Britain. Circle featured
fifty onefifty-onety-one participants including ten from Britain. But,
while those from overseas included major international figures such as
Mondrian, Lger, Gropius and Le Corbusier, the British artists  with the
exception of Nicholson, Barbara Hepworth and Henry Moore  were far less
well-known and the constructivist credentials of several were very weak.
The intention to publish Circle annually was frustrated by the outbreak of
Second World War and the departure of Gabo and others to the USA.


Naum Gabo was a leading Russian exponent of Constructivism who emigrated to
England in 1936 after leaving Russia and then living for a time in Germany.
In London, together with Mondrian, he became a neighbour and friend of Ben
Nicholson and the constructivist artist, John Cecil Stephenson. From these
contacts emerged the plan to launch an annual publication, Circle, as a
survey of international constructive art covering painting, sculpture and
architecture, and to hold related exhibitions. Gabo, Nicholson and the
architect Leslie Martin co-edited the book which was published in 1937,
alongside an exhibition of constructive art in the London Gallery.

The books editorial claimed that a new cultural unity is slowly emerging
out of the fundamental changes which are taking place in our present-day
civilization and that this unity was the constructive trend in the art of
our day (Martin 1937).  To support these claims,. the book showed 170
photographs of the work of  twenty one painters, ten sculptors and twenty
architectural practices. The exhibition was less comprehensive. Circle also
carried a number of essays by artists and architects whose work was
illustrated, and also by the art critics Herbert Read and Sigfried Geidion,
the modernist typographer, Jan Tschichold and the scientist J. D.Bernal.
Read, who had earlier commented that Nicholsons white reliefs were the
best type of painting to go with the new architecture (Read 1935), wrote
about the search for new forms of artistic expression and suggested that
there is no one way of doing this  we are at a stage of experimentation.
(Martin 1937:  p. 64).  A wide range of ideas within Circles
constructive sub-title wereas also evident from differences in the
authors essays. For example, Mondrian, unlike Gabo, made no reference to
cConstructivism in expounding his philosophy of neo-plasticism, while
Bernal was concerned with arts search for social utility and Nicholson
suggested that painting and religious experience are the same thing.
(Martin 1937:  p. 75).  That said, the concept of the art work as being
essentially rational and constructed from basic elements, underlay almost
everything illustrated and written about in Circle.

The artists and architects illustrated in Circle included many major
figures from across Europe, such as Arp, Gropius, Klee, Corbusier, Lger,
Moholy Nagy, and Mondrian. The ten British participants, with the exception
of Nicholson, Barbara Hepworth and Henry Moore were less well-known. It is
also open to question as to whether some of the British artists, apart from
John Cecil Stephenson (1889  1965), merited a constructivist label.
Hepworth and Moore were making bio-morphic sculptures while the painters
Arthur Jackson,  John Piper and Winifred Dacre were experimenting with hard-
edge abstraction. Nicholson, too, slowly abandoned a constructivist
approach when he later became the dominant landscape- influenced
abstractionist of the St Ives artists. Nevertheless, Circle has
significance in being the first event in British art history in which a
comprehensive array of international constructive art, including a British
component, was presented to the British art world.

The organisers intention to make this an annual event collapsed when, in
response to the worsening international situation in 1938 and the outbreak
of war in 1939, the European migrs began leaving Britain for the USA, and
Nicholson left London to live in St. Ives.



References and further reading


Checkland S. J., (2000), Ben Nicholson: the Vicious Circle of his Life and
Art,
           London: John Murray.
Harrison C., (1981) English Art and Modernism 1900  1939, New Haven &
London:
           Yale University Press.
Martin J.L., Nicholson B., Gabo. N., eds. (1937) Circle, London: Faber &
Faber
Nash A., Merket J., eds (1985) Naum Gabo: 60 Years of Constructivism, New
York:
          Prestel Verlag.
Read H., in Axis magazine April 1935, p. 16.


Images

                       [pic]
      Naum Gabo, Stone with a Collar, 1936/7, limestone, brass, slate, 37 x
72 55 cms
www.tate.org.uk/art/artworks/gabo-construction-stone-with-a-collar/t06975

           [pic]
           Ben Nicholson, White Relief, 1935, painted wood, 42.3 x 67.6 cms

www.mutualart.com/artwork/1935-white-relief/084F603C64BBD135


            [pic]
John Cecil Stephenson, Painting, 1937, tempera on canvas, 71.1 x 91.4 cms

www.tate.org.uk/art/artworks/stephenson-painting-t00617

