ROUTLEDGE ENCYCLOPEDIA OF MODERNISM 

Entries by Mal Ahern, 1/3





												CLOSE UP 

												

The journal Close Up, published between 1927 and 1933 in Territet, Switzerland, was one of the first English-language periodicals to address film theory and avant-garde cinema. Its diverse contributors included H.D. (neé Hilda Doolittle, 1886-1961), Sergei Eisenstein, John Grierson, Dorothy Richardson, and Gertrude Stein; and its influential subscribers included G.W. Pabst, Iris Barry, and Sylvia Beach.



Close Up was published by Bryher (neé Annie Winnifred Ellerman, 1894-1983), the English novelist and heiress to a shipping fortune; the Scottish painter and filmmaker, Kenneth Macpherson (1902-1971), was its editor. Bryher and Macpherson lived with the poet H.D, who was also a contributor. The trio also made Borderline (Macpherson, 1930), a feature film starring H.D. and Paul Robeson, and the short film Monkey’s Moon (Macpherson, 1929). 



Rather than proffer a definition of cinema’s unique ontology, Close Up sought, in Macpherson’s words, to “open the gate and let it out over the hills.” It explored an eclectic range of genres like surrealism, UFA modernism, the Soviet avant-garde, and Hollywood melodrama. The journal also mediated many debates about the transition from silent to sound cinema. For instance, Close Up was first to publish a widely-reprinted statement on sound cinema by the Soviet filmmakers Sergei Eisenstein, Vsevolod Pudovkin, and Grigori Alexandrov, who famously argued for a contrapuntal use of sound and image. Finally, Close Up raised the issue of film’s relationship to psychoanalysis, in a series of essays by practicing analysts Hans Sachs and Barbara Low. 



Bibliography:



Friedburg, A.,  Marcus, L., and MacDonald, J. (1998) Close Up 1927-1933: Cinema and Modernism. London: Continuum.



Guest, B. (1984) Herself Defined: The Poet H.D. and Her World. New York: Doubleday. 



Paratextual Materials:



Video:

Monkey’s Moon (Macpherson, 1929) and accompanying website by Beinecke Rare Books and Manuscript Library:

http://beinecke.library.yale.edu/collections/highlights/monkeys-moon-pool-films

Website describing the making of the film Monkey’s Moon, and 



Images:

Image of Bryher, publisher of Close Up, on the set of the film Borderline, 1929:

http://brbl-dl.library.yale.edu/vufind/Record/3472745



Image of Bryher’s press ticket for Close Up, undated:

http://brbl-dl.library.yale.edu/vufind/Record/3482016



Image of a subscription form for Close Up, 1931:

http://brbl-dl.library.yale.edu/vufind/Record/3482017



Websites:

Bryher Papers, Beinecke Rare Books and Manuscript Library:

http://beinecke.library.yale.edu/collections/highlights/bryher-papers

Website that contains photographs, letters, and manuscripts from the collection of Bryher, editor and publisher of Close Up. 



H.D. Papers, Beinecke Rare Books and Manuscript Library, Yale University:

http://beinecke.library.yale.edu/collections/highlights/hd-papers

Website that contains photographs, letters, and manuscripts from the collection of H.D., a major contributor to Close Up. 



MAL AHERN

Yale University