
Coleman, Ornette (1930-)
Dustin Garlitz

Ornette Coleman is an American jazz alto saxophonist and composer.  Coleman
is considered one of the founders of the AVANT-GARDE movement in jazz,
which he began performing and recording in the late 1950s.  The saxophonist
won the Pulitzer Prize for Music in 2007, awarded on the basis of his
recent album Sound Grammar.  Coleman became known in AVANT-GARDE jazz for
leading a piano-less quartet of musicians on alto saxophone, as first
documented on his 1959 album Tomorrow Is The Question!: The New Music of
Ornette Coleman.  Later that year, he signed a contract with Atlantic
Records, who first released his new jazz album The Shape of Jazz to Come.
Coleman pioneered a style of AVANT-GARDE music known as Free Jazz, or music
that rested completely on free improvisation in collective settings
distinct to modern jazz ensemble instrumentation.  This was first
documented in full on the self-titled release Free Jazz: A Collective
Improvisation by the Ornette Coleman Double Quartet (1961), one such that
featured a print of a painting by JACKSON POLLOCK as album art.  Coleman
has received high praise from major musicians, musical thinkers and figures
outside of the jazz tradition, most notably Leonard Bernstein and Virgil
Thomson.

      Ornette Coleman was born Randolph Denard Ornette Coleman on March 9,
1930 in Fort Worth, Texas.  Coleman first received wide attention among
notable and respected musicians in jazz in New York City, with his extended
engagement at the Five Spot Caf in Greenwich Village in November 1959.
The Five Spot Caf was a venue that had previously given extended
engagements to leading modernists in jazz such as pianist THELONIOUS MONK
and his Quartet featuring the tenor saxophonist JOHN COLTRANE in 1957.
Like MONK and COLTRANE, the music COLEMAN and his band premiered at the
noted Greenwich Village establishment was also been considered ahead of its
time by lead critics, music historians, listeners and musicians alike.  In
the 1960s, as the AVANT-GARDE movement in JAZZ had emerged in full, Coleman
became one of the movements icons in the US and internationally.  Coleman
and his band began touring overseas to regions of Europe that had been very
receptive to AVANT-GARDE and Free Jazz from its inception in the US,
including Scandinavia, namely Stockholm in Sweden.  In Stockholm, Colemans
performances were released as live albums by the American-based modern jazz
label Blue Note records, namely the Two Volumes of At the Golden Circle
(1965).

      Coleman incorporated strings in his compositions for live performance
in the 1960s and 1970s, as documented in his album-length composition Skies
of America (1972), performed by the London Symphony Orchestra.  His
compositions have been adapted for performance and recording by younger
generations of leaders in AVANT-GARDE music, most notably in other musical
contexts and instrumentation.  Such is the case of alto saxophonist JOHN
ZORN and his performance of Colemans compositions on the album Spy vs Spy
(1989), who recorded the musical works in a punk rock setting.  Although he
prefers to perform and record as a bandleader, Coleman has worked with
recording artists from other genres, such as Lou Reed and Yoko Ono, on
musical projects that have been released as their own.  He also performed
with Jerry Garcia and Gunther Schuller.


      Along with winning the Pulitzer Prize for Music in 2007, he was
awarded a Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award that year.  The University of
Michigan awarded Coleman an honorary doctorate in 2010 for his career
contributions to modern music.  His early career compositions such as
Lonely Woman, Peace, and Turnaround, all first recorded by him in
1959, have since become standards performed and recorded by AVANT-GARDE and
mainstream JAZZ artists alike.  He recorded an album entirely of tenor
saxophone playing, Ornette on Tenor (1962), while signed to Atlantic
Records.  However, rather than relying on tenor saxophone, Coleman more
commonly preferred to perform on violin and trumpet when not playing alto
saxophone in his AVANT-GARDE jazz dating from the 1960s.  He composed music
for the 1991 film adaptation of William S. Borroughss novel Naked Lunch.
Coleman was awarded a MacArthur Fellowship in 1994.

References and Further Readings:

Giddins, G. and S. DeVeaux (2009) Jazz, New York and London: W.W. Norton.

Gioia, T. (1997) The History of Jazz, New York and Oxford: Oxford
University Press.

Jost, E. (1994) Free Jazz, New York: Da Capo Press.

Lee, D. (2006) The Battle of the Five Spot: Ornette Coleman and the New
York Jazz Field, Toronto: Mercury Press

Litweiler, J. (1992) Ornette Coleman: A Harmolodic Life, London: Quartet
Books.

Mandel, H. (2007) Miles, Ornette, Cecil: Jazz Beyond Jazz, New York and
London: Routledge.

Whitehead, K. (2011) Why Jazz?: A Concise Guide, New York: Oxford
University Press.

Dustin Garlitz
University of South Florida
