
Conrad, Joseph (1857-1924)
John G. Peters, University of North Texas

SUMMARY
Joseph Conrad was one of the foremost British novelists of the modernist
period. Many of the narrative innovations he developed appeared a decade or
more before similar technical experimentation became the norm among
modernist writers. Furthermore, his radical skepticism was a stark contrast
to the Edwardian optimism evident in the years prior to the First World War
and anticipates the disillusionment so many modernist writers felt during
the post-war era. Best known for Heart of Darkness, Lord Jim, Nostromo,
The Secret Agent, The Secret Sharer, and Under Western Eyes, Conrad
influenced numerous writers who followed him, such as William Faulkner,
Graham Greene, F. Scott Fitzgerald, and an entire generation of African
writers who often found themselves in dialogue with Conrad: e.g., Chinua
Achebe and J. M. Coetzee.

MAIN ENTRY
      On December 3, 1857, Joseph Conrad was born Jzef Teodor Konrad
Korzeniowski in Berdyczw, a Polish region of Ukraine. His parents, Apollo
Korzeniowski (1820-1869) and Ewa Korzeniowska (ne Bobrowska, 1833-1865),
were Polish patriots during a time when Poland itself did not exist. Having
been conquered during the late eighteenth-century, Poland was divided among
Russia, Prussia, and Austria-Hungary. Conrads family lived in Russian-
occupied Polish territories, and his parents resisted Russian rule. As a
consequence, Apollo was arrested in 1861 and exiled with his family to
Vologda, a remote part of northern Russia. While in exile, Conrads mother
died of tuberculosis. His father also contracted the disease and was
allowed to return to Poland in 1868. He died the following year. Conrad was
then raised by his mothers family, particularly his uncle Tadeusz
Bobrowski (1829-1894), who treated Conrad like a son and strongly
influenced him.
      At fifteen, Conrad determined his life occupation would be that of a
sailor, and at seventeen he moved to Marseilles, France to train for the
merchant marine service. Upon graduation at twenty-one, he planned to join
the French merchant marine service, only to discover that he would require
the permission of the Russian government, which the government would not
give. As a result, a few months shy of his twenty-first birthday, he
decided to join the British merchant marine service, knowing no English.
Conrad then spent roughly twenty years sailing around the globe,
particularly in Southeast Asia, eventually working his way up from an
ordinary deckhand to captain of a sailing vessel. This experience later
served as the raw material for many of Conrads writings.
      In 1889, while on vacation in London, Conrad made a decision that
forever altered his life: he began writing what would become his first
novel, Almayers Folly (1895). He spent roughly five years writing it in
between his work as a ships officer. During these five years, Conrad spent
a short spell working on a steamboat on the Congo River, an experience that
changed his outlook on life. He is reputed to have said years later,
Before the Congo I was just a mere animal. While in the Congo, Conrad
worked alongside the Irish photo-journalist Roger Casement, who later
exposed the atrocities perpetuated by the Belgian trading company. This
experience would become the basis for An Outpost of Progress (1897) and
for his most famous work, Heart of Darkness (1899). Another life-changing
experience occurred in 1893 with his chance meeting of John Galsworthy
(1867-1933) while Conrad was serving as First Mate aboard the Torrens and
Galsworthy was a passenger aboard. Ironically, neither seems to have known
they would later become well-known authors. This chance encounter resulted
in a life-long friendship, Conrad even naming his second son after
Galsworthy.
      In 1894, Conrad completed the manuscript of Almayers Folly and sent
it to T. Fisher Unwin. One of Unwins readers was Edward Garnett (1868-
1937), who recommended publication and later became a friend and literary
confidant of Conrads. Conrad seems not to have been considering a change
in professions, but with Garnetts encouragement and maritime jobs suddenly
scarce, Conrad fell into his second profession as a writer. The publication
of Almayers Folly was indicative of Conrads early literary career. The
reviewers and literary world greatly appreciated it, but the purchasing
public was less enthusiastic. This pattern continued for nearly twenty
years, during which Conrad often struggled with writers block,
psychological depression, financial difficulties, and physical ailments.
Set in the Malay Archipelago, Almayers Folly was praised for its exotic
setting and descriptive powers. An Outcast of the Island followed in 1896
and brings back some of the characters and environment from Almayers
Folly, but set at an earlier time. Also around this time he married Jesse
George (1873-1936). In 1897, Conrad produced his first work to which the
term masterpiece began to be affixed. This novel, The Nigger of the
Narcissus, caused fellow literary figures such as Stephen Crane (1871-
1900) and Henry James (1843-1916) to take notice. During this time, Conrad
made several important literary friendships with such authors as Crane,
James, R. B. Cunninghame-Graham, H. G. Wells (1866-1946), Arnold Bennett
(1867-1931), and, most importantly, Ford Madox Ford (1873-1939), who
collaborated with Conrad and appears to have helped Conrad develop his
narrative techniques.
      The publication of The Nigger of the Narcissus ushered in a
particularly productive fifteen-year period during which many commentators
feel Conrad produced his finest work. In 1898, with the creation of his
narrator, Charlie Marlow, Conrad developed a narrative device that helped
him to distance himself from his material while simultaneously commenting
on it. Appearing first in Youth (1898) and then in two of his most highly-
regarded works, Heart of Darkness (1899) and Lord Jim (1900), Marlow
allowed Conrad to investigate more fully his impressionist narrative
techniques. While occasional narrative innovations had appeared in his
previous work, these tales established experimental techniques that would
influence the direction of modernist literary form, as happens in instances
of what Ian Watt has called delayed decoding (for example when Marlow
initially sees sticks flying about that then recognizes moments later as
arrows in Heart of Darkness). In fact, Conrad achieves a host of
narrative advancements: he demonstrates the fallibility of sensory
perception, reveals how all objects are objects of consciousness, and shows
how context influences how we experience phenomena  all while placing the
reader into the mind of the characters so that the reader experiences
phenomena at the same moment as the character, rather than through an
authors subsequent revisionist reading of an event. Other similar
techniques emphasize the role of perspective, context, and subjectivity in
representing phenomena. In Lord Jim in particular Conrad introduces
multiple narrators, whose personal perspective influences how phenomena
appear, and he presents events unfolding not in the sequence of their
occurrence but in the sequence of the narrators thoughts. These tales also
establish Conrads emphasis on his characters psychological struggles to
find meaning in a seemingly meaningless universe.
      Conrad followed Lord Jim with a political satire, The Inheritors
(1901), written in collaboration with Ford Madox Ford. The novel was not
the popular success the authors hoped for, but Conrad solidified his
reputation with the publication of two collections of stories: Youth and
Two Other Stories (1902) and Typhoon and Other Stories (1903). By this
point in his career, Conrad was viewed as a major literary figure, and the
term genius began to appear frequently in reviews of these collections.
Nostromo, Conrads most ambitious novel and one many consider to be
Conrads best work, appeared in 1904. The novels sheer panoramic scope
alone is remarkable, as Conrad creates a fictitious South American country,
complete with history, society, and politics, while investigating
revolutionary politics, global capitalism, and economic imperialism.
Despite its place in Conrads canon, Nostromo met a mixed response.
Conrads longest and most challenging novel was simply too difficult for
many readers. In 1906, Conrad published his first book of memoirs, The
Mirror of the Sea, and unlike Nostromo this book was warmly welcomed for
its direct narrative and lyric descriptions. Conrads next novel, The
Secret Agent (1907), is not only one of Conrads best novels, it may well
be his most perfectly controlled work. The narrative is permeated by irony,
and Conrads profound skepticism toward political systems comes to the
fore. Much of the next few years was spent writing Conrads last political
novel, Under Western Eyes (1911). In some ways, this novel is the
culmination of Conrads literary efforts. To an even greater degree,
Conrads skepticism toward political systems becomes apparent; he rejects
both the established government and its revolutionary opponents, showing
how both sides lose track of individuals, who are invariably crushed
between the opposing political forces. Under Western Eyes also continues
Conrads investigations into the complicated issues of moral behavior and
the psychological struggles of humanity in a modern world where absolute
truths appear to be absent.
      Conrad often experienced a minor bout of exhaustion after completing
a major project, but Under Western Eyes was different. This time, he
suffered a complete collapse. Whether because of the extensive time it took
to complete the book, the lengthy immersion into things Russian, the
constant financial pressure he felt, or all of these, Conrad remained ill
for nearly six months. A letter by Conrads wife talks of Conrad allowing
no one to touch the manuscript, and of his carrying on conversations with
the novels characters.
      After the publication of Under Western Eyes, Conrads works changed.
Some, such as Thomas Moser and Albert Guerard, have seen this as an abrupt
decline in Conrads literary abilities after a period of great achievement.
Others, such as Susan Jones, have seen it as a shift in artistic direction,
but whatever the case Conrads works after this novel (with only a few
exceptions) are different in both plot and emphasis. His next work, A
Personal Record (1912), was a memoir that sought to explain how Conrad
became a sailor and how he became a writer. Unlike most memoirs, its
narrative structure is not straightforward, nor does the volume reveal much
of its author.
      Conrads next fictional work was the collection Twixt Land and Sea
(1912). This volume contained perhaps Conrads final masterpiece, the story
The Secret Sharer (1910), written while he was finishing Under Western
Eyes. The other two stories are more like the work of the later Conrad,
with their emphasis on chance and romantic relationships. The collection
was a modest popular success and was followed by Chance (1914), Conrads
first truly popular work. The novel is noted for its narrative intricacy
and for its romance between Flora de Barral and Captain Anthony.
      With the publication of Chance, Conrad finally achieved financial
independence, but his works no longer tended to emphasize the plight of
humanity in the face of an indifferent universe, the importance of
confronting such an existence, and of attempting to create meaning in full
knowledge of its contingency. Instead, Chance emphasizes a universe
controlled by chance happenings and shifts greater value onto romantic
relationships. Conrad had always expressed the value of human
relationships, but his earlier work emphasized relationships themselves
less than their role in humanitys struggle in a meaningless universe.
      The following year, Conrad published Victory. Victory is often
considered to be among Conrads best works of this period, as it focuses on
rejecting nihilistic skepticism and embracing the necessity of connecting
with others.
      Presumably because of his response to the First World War, or perhaps
for some other reason, Conrads work of 1917 was unusual for this period.
The Tale, The Warriors Soul, and The Shadow-Line all present
characters confronting moral and psychological dilemmas that so often
marked his earlier career.
      Some twenty years after he began writing it, Conrad finally completed
The Rescue in 1920. This novel takes up the earlier period of events
appearing in Almayers Folly and An Outcast of the Islands, although with
far greater emphasis on romantic relationships.
      Conrads final completed novel, The Rover (1923), is set in
Napoleonic France and considers such issues as self-sacrifice, romantic
love, and patriotism.
      For some time, Conrad had felt that he was coming to the end of his
days, and on August 3, 1924, Conrad suffered a heart attack and died. A
final collection of stories, Tales of Hearsay (1925), appeared shortly
thereafter, along with an unfinished novel, Suspense (1925).
List of Works
Novels
Almayers Folly (1895)
An Outcast of the Islands (1896)
The Nigger of the Narcissus (1897)
Lord Jim (1900)
The Inheritors (1901) with Ford Madox Ford
Romance (1903) with Ford Madox Ford
Nostromo (1904)
The Secret Agent (1907)
Under Western Eyes (1911)
Chance (1914)
Victory (1915)
The Shadow-Line (1917)
The Arrow of Gold (1919)
The Rescue (1920)
The Rover (1923)
The Nature of a Crime (1924) with Ford Madox Ford
Suspense (1925) Unfinished
Short Story Collections
Tales of Unrest (1898)
Youth and Two Other Stories (1902)
Typhoon and Other Stories (1903)
A Set of Six (1908)
Twixt Land and Sea (1912)
Within the Tides (1915)
Tales of Hearsay (1925)
Memoirs
The Mirror of the Sea (1906)
A Personal Record (1912)
Drama
The Secret Agent (1923)
Laughing Anne and One Day More (1924)
Essays
Notes on Life and Letters (1921)
Last Essays (1926)
Letters
The Collected Letters of Joseph Conrad (1983-2007)
Further Reading
Biography
Baines, Jocelyn (1959), Joseph Conrad: A Critical Biography, London:
Weidenfeld and Nicolson.
Karl, Frederick R. (1979), Joseph Conrad: The Three Lives, New York:
Farrar, Straus and Giroux.
Najder, Zdzisaw (2007), Joseph Conrad: A Life, Trans. Halina Najder,
Rochester, NY: Camden House.
Stape, John (2007). The Several Lives of Joseph Conrad, London: William
Heinemann.
Bibliography
Ehrsam, Theodore G. A Bibliography of Joseph Conrad. Metuchen, NJ:
Scarecrow Press, 1969.
Peters, John G. Joseph Conrads Critical Reception. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2013.
Criticism
Berthoud, Jacques. Joseph Conrad: The Major Phase. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1978.

Fleishman, Avrom. Conrads Politics: Community and Anarchy in the Fiction
of Joseph Conrad. Baltimore, Md.: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1967.

Guerard, Albert J. Conrad the Novelist. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press, 1958.

Hawthorn, Jeremy. Joseph Conrad: Language and Fictional Self-Consciousness.
London: Edward Arnold, 1979.
. Joseph Conrad: Narrative Technique and Ideological Commitment. London:
      Edward Arnold, 1990.

Hay, Eloise Knapp. The Political Novels of Joseph Conrad: A Critical Study.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1963.

Jones, Susan. Conrad and Women. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1999.

Lothe, Jakob. Conrads Narrative Method. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1989.

Moser, Thomas C. Joseph Conrad: Achievement and Decline. Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press, 1957.
Peters, John G. Conrad and Impressionism. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 2001.
Parry, Benita. Conrad and Imperialism: Ideological Boundaries and Visionary
Frontiers. London: Macmillan, 1983.

Watt, Ian.  Conrad in the Nineteenth Century. Berkeley: University of
California Press, 1979.
