
Tristan Corbire (550 words)

Dead at thirty, author of a barely-noticed book of verses printed for hire
by a firm specializing in erotica, the small-town eccentric and invalid
Tristan Corbire (1845-1875) was destined for oblivion. But Paul Verlaines
short book Les Potes maudits (1878) put him in the company of Rimbaud,
Mallarm and Villiers de lIsle-Adam and ensured that he would continue to
be read.

      Corbire is unthinkable without the ruptures in French verse created
by Baudelaire, but in him there is no longing for the eternal and
cosmopolitan style Baudelaire dreamt of. Verlaine noted in Corbires
poetry hiccups, an attack of vomiting, ferocious and dazzling irony, bile
and fever tormenting themselves to the point of genius, and culminating in
what gaiety! Randall Jarrell similarly praised the poems dissonant,
anarchical, self-undercutting progress: Puns, mocking half-dead metaphors,
parodied clichs, antitheses and paradoxes, idioms exploited on every level
are the seven-league crutches on which the poems bound wildly forward.
Obtrusively self-conscious gags in chain reaction build up into a lyricism
like that of Shakespeares helpless Richard II:

      Cest  toi que je fis mes adieux  la vie,
       toi qui me pleuras, jusqu me faire envie
      De rester me pleurer avec toi. Maintenant
      Cest jou, je ne suis quun gteux revenant
      En os et (jallais dire en chair). La chose est sre,
      Cest bien moi, je suis l, - mais comme une rature. (Le Pote
contumace)

      This modernity, like Baudelaires, is a refusal of the classical
hierarchy of genres, styles and diction. Baudelaire resisted the Romantics
by outdoing them in both seriousness and prosaic content; Corbire attacks
them from below, with sarcasm and bathos. Lamartine, inventor of the
printed tear, is a frequent target. Corbires advice to the would-be poet
smacks of the tough guy and the self-admitted failure:

                 Laisse
      Ta boursedernire matresse
      Ton revolverdernier ami

      Drle de pistolet fini!
      Ou reste, et bois ton fond de vie
      Sur une nappe desservie (Paris)

      Les Amours jaunes, Corbires one collection, includes parodies,
monologues, narratives, and auto-eulogies (the astonishing Rondels pour
aprs). His Paris is a Bohme on the make: Bazar o rien nest en pierre,
/ O le soleil manque de ton. Va: trteaux, lupanars, glises, / Cour des
miracles, cour dassises: / - Quarts dheure dimmortalit! (Paris).
Hardly less sardonic but without the sneer, Corbires poems set in
Brittany give him the chance to write about people dun seul bloc de
bois: sailors, beggars, soldiers, shrine visitors begging for a miracle.
Ces anges mal lchs, ces durs enfants perdus! / Leur tte a du requin et
du petit-Jsus (Matelots).

      Though he sowed with salt the furrows of Romanticism, Corbire would
have descendants. Jules Laforgue, who devised a manner of digressive poetic
irony that would become the pattern for Eliots Prufrock, complained
about this Corbire that everyone is throwing in my face; Corbires
sequence Paris is one of the obvious models for Pounds Hugh Selwyn
Mauberley. Corbires readiness to throw every kind of languageslang,
dialect, loan word, calque, hapax, mispronunciationinto a poem anticipates
Cline, and his lines and stanzas structured around puns set a pattern for
Roussel, Breton, Leiris and the Ou.Li.Po. Verlaine was right: a poet under
a curse, but his curse has become the usual condition of a great part of
our poetic language.

Corbire, Tristan. Tristan Corbire, Charles Cros, Oeuvres compltes. Eds.
      Francis Burch, Louis Forestier, and Pierre-Olivier Walzer. Paris:
      Gallimard, 1970.
Steinmetz, Jean-Luc. Tristan Corbire: une vie -peu-prs. Paris: Fayard,
      2011.
Thomas, Henri. Tristan le dpossd. Paris: Gallimard, 1972.
Verlaine, Paul. Les potes maudits. Paris: Vanier, 1888.

