
Chara Kolokytha

Cubism

Cubism is an influential modernist art movement that emerged in Paris
during the first decade of the twentieth century. The term was established
by Parisian art critics, derived from Louis Vauxcelles, and possibly Henri
Matisses description of Braques reductive style in paintings of 1908.
Subsequently, it soon became a commonplace term and was widely used to
describe the formalist innovations in painting pioneered by Pablo Picasso
and Georges Braque from 1907 to 1914. Cubism signals the break with
Renaissance tradition through the rejection of three-dimensional
illusionist composition. The dull and monochromatic palette (Picasso, Still
Life with a Bottle of Rum, 1911) of early Cubist painting, in addition to
its emphasis on geometry, can be alternatively viewed as a reaction against
the pure bright colours of the Fauves and the spontaneous colour treatment
of the Impressionists. Cubist art was largely influenced by the late work
of Paul Czanne and the study of primitive art and, more precisely, African
religious masks, statuettes and artefacts. Picassos Les Demoiselles
dAvignon (1907) and Braques Maisons  lEstaque (1908) are considered to
be the first manifestations of proto-cubist painting.



However, artists such as Fernand Lger (Les fumeurs, 1912), Juan Gris
(Grapes, 1913) and Robert Delaunay (Windows, 1912) developed their own
distinctive styles, pushing forward the colour perspectives, the shifting
geometrical elements and the non-objective approach (Lger, Contraste de
formes, 1913) of the cubist synthesis. Alternative cubist perspectives were
also introduced by painters such as Jean Metzinger, Albert Gleizes, Henri
Le Fauconnier, Roger de La Fresnaye, Andr Lhote, and sculptors such as
Jacques Lipchitz and Henri Laurens. Its influence was not limited to
painting and sculpture but extended to architecture, poetry, music,
literature and the applied arts.

Conceptual and Perceptual Cubism


Cubism gained worldwide recognition from the second decade of the twentieth
century onwards. However, it expanded and evolved rapidly in Paris so that
a large number of Cubist-influenced styles emerged that differ
substantially to that of Picasso and Braque. This variation mainly resides
in the perceptual, either quasi-figurative (Lhote, L'Escale, 1913) or
purely abstract cubist perspective that several artists brought forward
(Delaunay, Fentres ouvertes simultanment, 1912). In addition to the
emphasis on solid geometry, their vivid colour palette replaced the proto-
cubist perpetual use of greys, browns and blacks and opposed its simplified
geometrical surfaces that are divided into plastic planes viewed from
different angles and result in the conceptual perspective of early cubism
(La Fresnaye, The Conquest of the Air, 1913).

In fact, the style was never homogenous but raised controversy among its
agents. This became evident in 1911, with the occurrence of the so-called
Puteaux Group (1911-1913) of Cubist artists, including Alexander
Archipenko, Gleizes, Metzinger, Frank Kupka, Marcel Duchamp and Lger, who
frequented the studios of Jacques and Raymond Duchamp-Villon. The groups
art can be viewed as a reaction against the conceptual and non-humanitarian
approach of Picasso, Braque, and Gris. A similar reaction is manifested in
the works of several other artists such as Lhote and La Fresnaye who
practised a perceptual and quasi-figurative style.

Although most of these artists taught Cubism in private art academies and
had exhibited their compositions since 1911 at the Salon des Indpendants
and the Salon dAutomne, the generators and leaders of this style (Picasso,
Braque, Gris, Lger) were working in private under the patronage of the art
dealer Daniel Henri Kahnweiler. Clearly, this fact not only contributed to
the popularisation of the perceptual and the geometrically abstract cubist
technique in the following decades, but also reflects the over-simplified
and legible repertoire of most of these artists in opposition to the
constant experimentation and renovation of Kahnweilers protgs.

Analytic and Synthetic Cubism

Due to its complexity, Cubism became subject to several formal and
stylistic categorizations and even philosophical interpretations. Its
division into the two phases Analytic and Synthetic has been widely
used, although it is chronologically flexible and has been questioned by
scholarship because it was not literally accepted by cubist artists. This
division was introduced later by Kahnweiler who proposed to better explain
and classify the stylistic experimentations and developments of this style.
Both phases include the work of Picasso and Braque.

Analytic cubism, also referred to as Hermetic cubism, is a term used to
describe the early achievements of the cubist stylistic innovations and
extends approximately from 1910 to 1912. It concerns the simultaneous
depiction on a two dimensional surface of several sides of a three
dimensional object-subject (Picasso, Portrait of D.-H. Kahnweiler, 1910).
Although this technique may be seen as abstract it is, in reality,
essentially figurative but aims to re-treat and re-interpret the
conventional composition (Braque, Portuguese, 1911). Therefore, the
depicted objects are mainly still lives that tend to become easily
recognisable as they draw inspiration from everyday life (bottles, tables,
musical instruments, books, newspapers) often accompanied by letters or
words that describe them (Braque, Clarinet and bottle of rum on a
mantelpiece, 1911).

Synthetic cubism extended from 1912 to 1914 and introduced the collage
technique, the use of vivid colours and different types of materials,
mainly paper (wall-paper, papiers colls, paper cut-outs, textiles), that
contribute to the maintenance of the solid structure of the composition and
render it legible through the creation of an architectonic illusion of
space and volume  (Picasso,
Still Life with Chair-caning, 1912). This phase exerted considerable
influence over the surrealist treatment of the object.


List of Works

Pablo Picasso, Les Demoiselles dAvignon (The young ladies of Avignon), oil
on canvas, 1907, Museum of Modern Art, New York.

Georges Braque, Maisons  lEstaque (Houses at lEstaque), oil on canvas,
1908, Museum of Fine Arts, Bern.

Picasso, Portrait of Daniel-Henri Kahnweiler, oil on canvas, 1910, Art
Institute of Chicago.

Braque, Clarinet and bottle of rum on a mantelpiece, oil on canvas, 1911,
Tate Gallery, London.

Georges Braque, Portuguese, oil on canvas, 1911, Kunstmuseum Basel, Basel,
Switzerland.

Pablo Picasso, Still Life with a Bottle of Rum, oil on canvas, 1911, The
Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York.

Fernand Lger, Les fumeurs (The Smokers), oil on canvas, 1912, Solomon R.
Guggenheim Museum, NewYork.

Robert Delaunay, Windows, oil and wax on canvas, 1912, Museum of Modern
Art, New York.

Fernand Lger, Contraste de formes (Contrast of forms), oil on canvas,
1913, Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, NewYork.

Picasso, Still Life with Chair-caning, oil on oil-cloth over canvas edged
with rope, 1912, Muse Picasso, Paris.

Robert Dealaunay, Fentres ouvertes simultanment (Windows open
simultaneously), 1912, Tate Gallery, London.

Andr Lhote, L'Escale (The layover), oil on canvas, 1913, Muse d'art
Moderne de la Ville de Paris.

Juan Gris, Grapes, oil on canvas, 1913, Museum of Modern Art, New York.

Roger de la Fresnaye, The Conquest of the Air, oil on canvas, 1913, Museum
of Modern Art, New York.

[pic]

Georges Braque, Portuguese, oil on canvas, 1911, Kunstmuseum Basel, Basel,
Switzerland.

[pic]
Picasso, Still Life with Chair-caning, oil on oil-cloth over canvas edged
with rope, 1912, Muse Picasso, Paris.
http://lukerobinson.pushinit.co.uk/wp-content/uploads/2011/04/chaircan.jpg


References and further reading

Golding, J. (1959) Cubism: a history and an analysis, 1907-1914, London,
Faber&Faber.

Fry, E. (1966), Cubism, New York, McGraw-Hill.

Gee, M. (1981) Dealers, critics, and collectors of modern painting: aspects
of the Parisian art market between 1910 and 1930, New York; London,
Garland.

Cooper, D. (1983) The essential Cubism, 1907-1920: Braque, Picasso and
their friends, London, Tate Gallery.

Roskill, M. W. (1985), The interpretation of cubism, Philadelphia, Art
Alliance Press.

Green, C. (1987) Cubism and its enemies: modern movements and reaction in
French art, 1916-1928, New Haven, Yale University Press.

Rubin, W. S. (1989), Picasso and Braque: pioneering cubism, New York,
Museum of Modern Art.

Cox, N. (2000), Cubism, London, Phaidon.

Cottington, D. (2004), Cubism and its histories, Manchester; New York,
Manchester University Press.

Antliff, M., Leighten, P. D. (2008) A Cubist reader: documents and
criticism, 1906-1914, Chicago, University of Chicago Press.

