
Anthony Parton

Cubo-Futurism

Cubo-Futurism (Kubo-Futurizm) was a term used by the early 20th century
Russian avant-garde to describe literary and artist works that represented
a fusion of Cubist and Futurist styles and principles. The term first
surfaced in 1912, at a point when the Russian avant-garde were exposed,
simultaneously, to Analytical Cubism and Italian Futurism. At this stage in
their development young Russian poets and painters were beginning to move
away from forms of Expressionism and to explore more innovative approaches.
Cubism and Futurism offered the ideological and practical means to engage
with abstraction and, ultimately, non-objectivity, in a serious and
distinctive manner. By 1915, however, Cubism and Futurism had exhausted
their usefulness for these poets and painters, who had now passed into
completely new territory in the form of Velimir Khlebnikovs and Aleksei
Krucheynykhs zaum (transrational) poetry, Kazimir Malevichs Suprematism
and, subsequently, Vladimir Tatlins and Aleksandr Rodchenkos
Constructivism. Whilst a distintive movement across the ranks of the avant-
garde in the pre-war period, Cubo-Futurism possessed an episodic character
and manifested as a transitional phase in the history of Russian avant-
garde art and literature in the early 20th century. It was a bridge by
which the Russians approached their radical non-objective  conclusions of
the 1920s.

 In terms of painting the key male practitioners of Cubo-Futurism included
MIKHAIL LARIONOV and KAZIMIR MALEVICH. The former used his Cubo-Futurist
learning to develop the first non-objective style of painting in Russian
known as RAYISM, whilst the latter used it as a launch pad for the
development of SUPREMATISM. By its very nature, however, Cubo-Futurism
demanded an aptitude for synthesis and therefore, according to contemporary
(male) critics, the style appealed particularly to women painters (who were
held to a have a capacity for synthesis over that of analysis). Cubo-
Futurism, therefore, was chiefly taken up by the women artists of the
Russian avant-garde: NATALIA GONCHAROVA, Aleksandra Exter, Olga Rozanova,
Liubov Popova and Nadezhda Udaltsova. For all of these artists Cubo-
Futurism represented a transitionary phase towards their mature work. They
were sufficiently aware of their dependence upon their sources to openly
acknowledge their interests. Popova, for example, boldly stencilled the
wordsCubi Futurismo across her Portrait of 1914-1915 (Thesaloniki:
State Museum of Contemporary Art). The Cubo-Futurist work of all these
artists was highly individualistic. Cubo-Futurism was not a group style but
was extremely diverse, being dictated by the particular predilections on
the part of each individual artist for specific Cubist and Futurist
painters and their individual encounters with specific examples.

In terms of Russian avant-garde literature, Cubo-Futurism was explored by
the poets David Burliuk, Benedict Livshits, Alexandr Kamensky and Vladimir
Maiakovsky. It found its fullest and most accomplished expression, however,
in the work of Velimir Khlebnikov and Aleksei Kruchenykh. These two poets
began to fragment both the word and syntax as PICASSO and BRAQUE were
perceived to have fragmented the objects in their paintings. The images of
their poems frequently overlap and merge, recalling the use of Cubist
passage or or the stream of consciousness imagery of Futurist painting.
By a applying a Cubist and Futurist approach to the verbal mass Khlebnikov
and Kruchenych created a revolutionary form of abstract sound poetry called
zaum (beyond sense) in which conventional meanings associated with words
began to founder and  the poem increasinlgy operated as an excercise in
pure sound, hence paving the way for the formation of the Russian Formalist
School of literature and literary criticism. Some of the best achievements
of Russian Cubo-Futurism are be found not simply in the paintings or the
poems but rather in the Russian avant-garde books that these artists
published at the time. These interdisicplinary publications, which combined
word and image, provided the poets and painters with a laboratory space
within which they could test out both the limitations and potential of
Cubism and Futurism as they approached more mature and innovative
conclusions.



References

Bowlt, J. and Drutt, M. (1999), Amazons of the Avant-Garde, London: Royal
Academy of Art

Compton, S. (1978), The World Backwards: Russian Avant-Garde Books 1912-
1916, London: British Museum Publications

Janececk, G. (1984), The Look of Russian Literature 1900-1930, Princeton:
Princeton University Press

Livshits, B. ( 1977), The One-and-a-Half-Eyed Archer. Trans. & Annotated by
J. E. Bowlt, Newtoneville, MA: Oriental Research Partners.

Gray, C. (1986), The Russian Experiment in Art 1863-1922, Revised Ed. By
Burleigh-Motley, M., London: Thames & Hudson.



Suggested Image: Liubov Popova, Study for a Portrait, 1914-1915, oil on
cardboard, 59.5x41.6cm. State Museum of Contemporary Art, George Costakis
Collection, Thessaloniki, Greece.

Image
http://www.greekstatemuseum.com/kmst/collections/db/search.html?primary_cont
rol_0=AN&secondary_control_0=C&tertiary_control_text_0=Popova&start=87&show=
1



[pic]
