
Paul Czanne (1839-1906)
Paul Czanne was a French painter, whose innovative techniques and original
interpretations of traditional genres made him perhaps the most influential
artist in the early history of modernism.  Affiliated primarily with POST-
IMPRESSIONISM, Czanne famously declared: I wanted to make of
Impressionism something solid and enduring like the art in the museums.
Along with his Post-Impressionist contemporaries PAUL GAUGUIN, VINCENT VAN
GOGH, and GEORGES SEURAT, Czanne advanced the lessons of the Impressionist
painters with whom he was initially affiliated.  His grasp of color and
composition, however, reflect his study of ugene Delacroix and Nicolas
Poussin.  But it was Czannes ability to represent underlying structures
in nature while retaining gestural but disciplined brushstrokes that earned
him the admiration of artists such as HENRI MATISSE and PABLO PICASSO.

Also see ABSTRACT ART, AVANT-GARDE, GEORGES BRAQUE, CUBISM, PAUL GAUGUIN,
HENRI MATISSE, PABLO PICASSO, PASSAGE TECHNIQUE, POST-IMPRESSIONISM,
GEORGES SEURAT and VINCENT VAN GOGH.

Career
Czanne was born in Aix-en-Provence, where  at his fathers behest  he
studied law before devoting himself to painting in his early twenties.
Dividing his time between Paris and Aix, Czanne studied at the Acadmie
Suisse and tried twice, but failed to be admitted to the prestigious cole
des Beaux-Arts.  Dark, lurid palettes and perverse subjects of murder and
sexual intrigue characterize his early work, examples of which were several
times rejected from the official Salon.

At the same time, Czanne fell in with the Impressionist painters and
eventually participated in two of their exhibitions (1874 and 1877).  He
befriended Camille Pissarro, with whom he painted en plein air; under
Pissarros tutelage, Czanne developed several distinctive techniques
including the PASSAGE TECHNIQUE.  His unique method of overlapping and
blending planes to integrate objects in space is especially apparent in his
many depictions of Mont Sainte-Victoire near Aix.  The technique enabled
him to simplify formal relationships in nature without compromising its
visual complexity.  He also experimented in other traditional genres such
as still life and portraiture, creating psychologically opaque self-
portraits and depictions of his wife Hortense Fiquet.

[pic] Paul Czanne, Mont Sainte-Victoire Seen from Bellevue (1882-85)

By the early 1890s, Czanne had returned to Aix for good.  In 1895, he had
his first one-man show in the Paris gallery of Ambroise Vollard and in 1904
the Salon dAutomne honored him with a special exhibition.  Czannes late
work continued his repetitive analysis of motifs in nature; it reveals a
distillation of formal relationships that create more expressive and
ambiguous content.  The most noteworthy and ambitious pictures from this
period are his three large-scale Bather paintings that culminated in The
Large Bathers from 1906, the year of his death.  When the German collector
Karl Ernst Osthaus visited the painters studio that year, he aptly
observed: The tall shafts of the trees bent down, already forming the
cathedral vault beneath which unfolded the scene of bathers.

                                Paul Czanne, The Large Bathers (1906) [pic]

Legacy
In 1907, the Salon dAutomne hosted a memorial retrospective of Czannes
work that influenced many AVANT-GARDE painters.  This exhibition was a
major factor in the development of CUBISM; GEORGES BRAQUE and PABLO PICASSO
emulated Czannes PASSAGE TECHNIQUE to fracture form and depict many views
of the same subject simultaneously.  HENRI MATISSE, who called Czanne a
god of painting, admired the bathers, and VASILY KANDINSKY credited
Czanne with anticipating ABSTRACT ART.

Key Reference Works:
Badt, Kurt.  Die Kunst Czannes (1956)
Cachin, Franoise, et. al. Czanne (1996)
Doran, P. Michael, ed.  Conversations avec Czanne (1978)
Rewald, John.  Czanne: A Biography (1948)
Schapiro, Meyer.  Paul Czanne (1952)

