
Das, Jibanananda (1899-1954)
Sibaji Bandyopadhyay

Jibanananda Das was one of the pre-eminent Bengali poets of the first half
of the twentieth century. With the posthumous entry of his prose-writings
to the public domain, it is now generally accepted that Jibanananda was
also a storyteller and a novelist of the first rank.

Jibanananda was born in the district-town Barishal (now in Bangladesh) in a
Brahma household. After obtaining the M. A. degree in English from the
Calcutta University in 1921, he taught in various colleges. He married in
1930; but, failing to found a happy family, he spent the rest of his life
tied to a family unhappy in its own way.

Jibanananda was a prolific writer, and, at the same time, a habitual
recluse. This peculiar combination has partly determined the history of
Jibananandas reception and reputation. More importantly, it has left an
indelible mark on the style and syntax of his poetic thought-experiments.
For a long time he was tagged as Bengals loneliest poet. This popular
appellation was a gift of Buddhadeva Bose (1908-1974): the modernist poet
who in his journal Kabita (Poetry) passionately celebrated Jibananandas
early productions. So contagious was Boses critical appraisal that soon
the expression loneliest poet became one of two focal points for any
evaluation of Jibanananda. Ironically, the provider of the other
Archimedean point was Rabindranath Tagore (1861-1941), the titan from
whose grips the Bengali modernists were self-consciously trying to free
their poesy. Reacting positively to the Jibanananda-poem published in the
first issue of Kabita in 1935, Rabindranath described it as chitrarupamaya
or image-full. Quickly a consensus emerged: Bengals loneliest poet was
also a master-craftsman of imagery. The same consensus helped to draw a
battle-line and configure two contending camps, one appreciative of
Jibanananda and the other hostile to him. The first, tended to privilege
aesthetics over politics and the second to reverse the order. The net-
result: Jibanananda was either championed as the epitome of angst-ridden,
alienated, awkward singularity or denigrated as being fixated on dabbling
in form, rabble-despising, self-absorbed escapist. The curious aspect of
the convergence in the seeming divergences of view among the left-leaning
and not-so left-leaning poet-critics was that judgments were made solely on
the basis of the first crop of Jibananandas poetry.

Undeniably, Jibananandas first three books  Jhara Palak (Fallen
Feathers: 1927), Dhusar Pandulipi (Faded Manuscripts: 1936), Banalata
Sen (1942)  contained exceptional poems. They also shared certain
affinities with his 1934 cycle of poems mourning the lost beatitude of
rural Bengalpublished much later in 1957 and named Rupasi Bangla
(Beautiful Bengal), these elegiac ruminations almost instantly captivated
the (urban) readers.

The fourth book printed in his life-time Mahaprithibi (The Great Earth:
1944) flagged a fresh departure. Then on, the emphasis steadily shifted
from brooding lamentations of a wounded subject to rigorous engagements
with the maladies of the day by an anguished observer. Satti Tarar Timir
(The Darkness of the Seven Stars: 1948), the last book to have come out
during his life, as well as the subsequent anthologies prepared by
collating Jibananandas poems scattered in various journals, went on to
strengthen the new trend.

Jibananandas later poetry was not contemplative but reflexive. Deeply
infused by a sense of history yet never wholly shackled by historicist
recounting, it also gave a new depth to the understanding of geography.
Jibananandas coming out of Bengal resulted in instituting a simmering
metonymic relationship between diverse spaces; his poetry became so
situated that it could mix and match Africa, Europe, the Americas, Asia,
Rome-Berlin-Hong Kong-Calcutta with an urbane lan thitherto absent in
Bengali poetry. What was more, the complex diction was suffused with a
sardonic sense of humour. Many of Jibananandas novels, e.g. Malyaban,
Sutirtha, both written in 1948, evince the same characteristics.


Timeline

1920        MA in English from Presidency College, Calcutta
1927        Publication of Jhara Palak
1934        Writes poems which later form Rupasi Bangla
1935        Joins the faculty of Brojmohun College, Barisal
1936        Publication of Dhusar Pandulipi
1942        Publication of Banalata Sen
1948        Writes two novels and a collection of poems
1957        Posthumous publication of Rupasi Bangla

Selected Reading
   Clinton B. Seely, A Poet Apart: A Literary Biography of the Bengali Poet
   Jibanananda Das, Newark, Delaware: University of Delaware Press; London
   and Toronto: Associated University Presses, 1990.
   Winter, Joe, 'Jibanananda Das  Naked Lonely Hand' (Selected poems),
   London: Anvil Press Poetry Ltd., London, 2003.
   Chidananda Dasgupta, Selected Poems - Jibanananda Das, New Delhi: Penguin
   Books, 2006.
   Debiprasad Bandyopadhyay (ed.), Jibanananda Daser Kabyasamgraha
   [Complete Poetry of Jibanananda Das], Kolkata: Bharbi, 1996.
   Bhumendra Guha, Alekhya [A Sketch], Kolkata: Ananda Publishers, 1999.
   Sibaji Bandyopadhyay, Prasanga: Jibanananda [Of Jibanananda], Kolkata:
   Gangchil, 2011.










