
Michael Johnson
Newcastle University

De Stijl (1917-1932)

De Stijl (The Style) was an avant-garde artistic group founded in the
Netherlands in 1917.  The name was also applied to a journal used to
propagate the groups theories and published between 1917 and 1932.  Led by
the painters THEO VAN DOESBURG and PIET MONDRIAN, the group developed an
abstract, elemental style based upon primary colours, geometric planes and
right angles.  Pursuing spiritual harmony based upon mathematical order, De
Stijl formulated a universal language of pure form and colour.  This became
paradigmatic of Modernist visual art and design.

In 1915 the painter and theorist Theo van Doesburg encountered the work of
Piet Mondrian, who had developed a visual style consisting of primary
colours and asymmetrical, orthogonal grids.  Mondrian was inspired by the
mystical ideas of the Theosophists, particularly the eccentric
mathematician M.H.J. Schoenmaekers, who devised a Neo-Platonic philosophy
based upon pure geometric form.  Influenced by Schoenmaekerss publications
The New Image of the World (1915) and Principles of Plastic Mathematics
(1916), Mondrian developed an artistic philosophy known as Neo-Plasticism
(Nieuwe Beelding):

      This new plastic idea will ignore the particulars of appearance, that
      is to say, natural form and colour. On the contrary, it should find
      its expression in the abstraction of form and colour, that is to say,
      in the straight line and the clearly defined primary colour . . .
      [This art allows] only primary colours and non-colours, only squares
      and rectangles, only straight and horizontal or vertical line.

De Stijl was inherently Modernist because it aimed to achieve pure
abstraction and simplicity by reducing all elements down to their essential
form.  In doing do, its proponents aimed to discover universal laws of
spiritual harmony in both art and life.

[pic]

Piet Mondrian, Composition with Yellow, Blue, and Red, 193742, Tate
Gallery, London

http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/7/72/Mondrian_CompRYB.jpg
In 1917, van Doesburg and Mondrian founded a journal called De Stijl and
used it to promote the new aesthetic.  Van Doesburg edited the journal from
its inception until his death in 1931.  A loose coalition of artists,
designers, poets and thinkers formed around the eponymous journal and used
it as a forum for their ideas.  These included the architect J.J.P. OUD,
the Hungarian artist Vilmos Huszr (1884-1960), the Belgian sculptor
Georges Vantongerloo (1886-1965) and the poet Antony Kok (1882-1969).  The
designer and architect GERRIT RIETVELD joined the group in 1919 and
extended the style to three-dimensional objects and spaces.  His
experimental Red-Blue Chair (1918) can be interpreted as a three-
dimensional version of a Mondrian painting.  The intersection of planes and
lines emphasised rather than impeded the surrounding space, and the ends of
each strut were painted yellow to convey a sense of vectors shooting off
into infinity.

De Stijl produced relatively few architectural structures, but Rietveld
designed the Schrder House in Utrecht (1924), which remains the most
complete expression of De Stijl principles.  The house is an ensemble of
interlocking planes and lines held in balance.  The interior spaces have
been reduced down to their underlying geometry in order to discover their
essential form.  The abiding impression is that Mondrians two-dimensional
images have been extrapolated to three dimensions, thus creating an all-
encompassing environment.

Proponents of De Stijl were motivated by a Utopian impulse to remodel the
built environment according to universal laws of geometry, thereby
elevating humanity to a higher intellectual and spiritual plane.  To this
end, Van Doesburg was determined to purify architecture and the applied
arts.  He designed colour schemes, stained glass and tiled floors for a
number of architectural collaborations.  In a departure from strict
horizontal and vertical axes, his ambitious scheme for the Caf de
lAubette in Strasbourg used diagonals to create an effect of dynamic
tension, an innovation which alienated Mondrian and prompted his departure
from the group.

[pic]

Interior of Gerrit Rietvelds Schrder House, Utrecht, Netherlands, 1924.

http://www.design-museum.de/en/exhibitions/current-exhibitions.html

De Stijl was profoundly influential within avant-garde circles.  Van
Doesburg taught intermittently at the BAUHAUS, which was founded two years
after the De Stijl movement, and encouraged Bauhaus designers to abandon
their early Expressionist aesthetic in favour of pure geometric simplicity.
 The group began to dissipate in the late 1920s and finally came to an end
with van Doesburgs premature death in 1931.  A final edition of De Stijl
was published by van Doesburgs widow the following year.  Despite its
abrupt demise, De Stijl exerted a long-lasting influence on Modernist
architects such as LE CORBUSIER and LUDWIG MIES VAN DER ROHE.

[pic]

Theo van DoesburgContra Composition XVI

http://triangleshirt.blogspot.co.uk/2010/12/theo-van-doesburg.html

References and further reading

Baljeu, J. (1974) Theo van Doesburg. London: Studio Vista.  (A
comprehensive monograph that analyses van Doesburgs role as the editor of
De Stijl and includes translations of his key writings).

Blotkamp, C. (1986) De Stijl: the formative years: 1917-1922. Cambridge,
Mass.: MIT Press. (A collection of nine essays that provide a pluralist
view of De Stijl in the early phase).

Hoek, E., Blokhuis, M., Goovaerts, I. and Kamphuys, N. et al. (2000) Theo
Van Doesburg: Oeuvre Catalogus. Centraal Museum. (A Dutch-language
catalogue of van Doesburgs work).

Jaffe, H. L. C. (1970) De Stijl: extracts from the magazine, London: Thames
and Hudson. (Extracts from the magazine De Stijl; selected and edited by
Hans L.C. Jaff and translated into English).
Mondrian, P. (1993) The New Art, the New Life: The Collected Writings of
Piet Mondrian. Cambridge, Mass.: Da Capo Press. (A comprehensive collection
of Mondrians essays, letters, notes, and interviews).

Overy, P. (1991) De Stijl: Art, Architecture, Design, London: Thames &
Hudson.  (A concise and accessible study of the De Stijl movement).

Troy, N.J. (1983) The De Stijl Environment, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
(This book explores the group's approach to exterior and interior spaces
and to furniture).

White, M. (2003) De Stijl and Dutch Modernism. Manchester: Manchester
University Press.  (This was the first book to view the De Stijl movement
within the context of Dutch Modernism, exploring debates concerning
abstraction in painting and spatiality in architecture).





