
Entartete Kunst (Degenerate Art)
Entartete Kunst (Degenerate Art) is a term that was used by Nazi
authorities to identify, censure, and confiscate art they considered
inconsistent with their ideology.  It was the cornerstone of an ambitious
propaganda campaign that culminated in the exhibition Entartete Kunst,
which took place in Munich in 1937.  The majority of this so-called
degenerate art was AVANT-GARDE in both form and subject.  ABSTRACT ART by
German artists, including MAX BECKMANN, MAX ERNST, ERNST LUDWIG KIRCHNER,
PAUL KLEE, and FRANZ MARC, was particularly vulnerable to Nazi attack; non-
German artists such as VASILY KANDINSKY and PIET MONDRIAN were also singled
out.  As a polarizing concept, Entartete Kunst stems from an essentially
anti-modernist, xenophobic and anti-Semitic position.  It was designed to
legitimize the art of the Third Reich, which was rooted in traditional art
forms and characterized by an idealized naturalism that promoted heroic
virtues and racial purity.

Also see AVANT-GARDE, MAX BECKMANN, MAX ERNST, ERNST LUDWIG KIRCHNER, PAUL
KLEE, OSKAR KOKOSCHKA, NAZI MODERNISM, FRANZ MARC, PIET MONDRIAN, and
PRIMITIVISM.

Policy and Legislation
The bureaucratic structures that Adolf Hitler and his surrogates
established to legislate Entartete Kunst were wide-reaching, disciplined,
and destructive.  Soon after Hitler came to power in 1933, a number of
artists, who were later labeled degenerate, were dismissed from their
teaching positions.  Several prominent museum directors were also dismissed
due to their support for AVANT-GARDE art.  Joseph Goebbels established the
Reichskulturkammer (Reich Chamber of Culture) that regulated cultural
matters including the visual arts.  Under his leadership, the Deutscher
Kunstbericht (German Art Report) was published in 1933 and proclaimed: All
works of a cosmopolitan or Bolshevist nature should be removed from German
museums and collections, but first they should be exhibited to the public,
who should be informed of the details of their acquisition and then [the
artworks should be] burned.  This report anticipated the systematic
confiscation of Entartete Kunst, which began in 1937, from museums,
galleries, and private collections.  It also predicted the planning and
mounting of exhibitions throughout Germany devoted to degenerate art.
This campaign was, however, not without certain contradictions.  For
instance, Goebbels was covertly ambivalent about some of the AVANT-GARDE
artists he was tasked with denouncing, and the Reich profited from the sale
of confiscated artworks it had earlier vowed to burn.

Exhibition and Impact on Artists
On July 19, 1937, the exhibition Entartete Kunst opened in Munich the day
after the nearby Grosse Deutsche Kunstausstellung (Great German Art
Exhibition) opened in the Haus der Deutschen Kunst.  The proximity and
timing of these opposing exhibitions were meant to amplify the Reichs
message of cultural purity.  Artworks freshly purged from museum
collections were featured in Entartete Kunst on walls that displayed
tendentious slogans such as: Nature as seen by sick minds, An insult to
German womanhood, and Revelation of the Jewish racial soul.  The cover
of the exhibition brochure featured a sculpture by the AVANT-GARDE artist
Otto Freundlich, whose PRIMITIVIST aesthetic and Jewish identity were
anathema to Nazi ideology.  Entartete Kunst cost many of the artists it
represented their homeland and, in some cases, their lives.  On the day the
exhibition opened, MAX BECKMANN fled to Amsterdam and never returned to
Germany; MAX ERNST eluded the Gestapo in France and emigrated to America.
In 1938, ERNST LUDWIG KIRCHNER committed suicide and in 1943, Otto
Freundlich was killed in a concentration camp.

[pic]Cover of Ausstellungsfhrer Entartete Kunst (Exhibition Brochure,
Degenerate Art) by Fritz Kaiser, 1937

Key Reference Works:
Adam, Peter.  Art of the Third Reich (1992)
Barron, Stephanie, ed. Degenerate Art: The Fate of the Avant-Garde in
Nazi Germany (1991)
Bussmann, Georg, ed.  Kunst im Dritten Reich: Dokumente der Unterwerfung
(1974)
Fleckner, Uwe, ed.  Angriff auf die Avantgarde. Kunst und Kunstpolitik im
Nationalsozialismus (2007)
Kaiser, Fritz.  Ausstellungsfhrer Entartete Kunst (1937)

