Taylor & Francis – Encyclopedia of Modernism



About you

[Salutation]

Daniel

[Middle name]

Bangert



[Enter your biography]



University of New South Wales



Your article

Denkmäler der Tonkunst in Österreich	

Monuments of Music in Austria

The Denkmäler der Tonkunst in Österreich [Monuments of Music in Austria] is a series of critical editions of historical music, primarily by composers born or working in Austria during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. The Denkmäler der Tonkunst in Österreich (DTÖ) was an initiative of the musicologist Guido Adler who served as its founding General Editor. 



In 1888, the musicologist Guido Adler petitioned the Austrian Ministry of Culture and Education for the publication of a series of editions of historical music (Monumenta Historiae Musices), a project that was to become the DTÖ. Adler became General Editor of the series at a meeting of the Gesellschaft zur Herausgabe von Denkmälern der Tonkunst in Österreich (Society for the Publication of Monuments of Music in Austria) held in 1893, and the first volume of the series appeared in 1894 (Masses by Johann Joseph Fux). Adler served as General Editor from 1893-1938; others who have held the position include Erich Schenk (1939-74) and Othmar Wessely (1974-98). Music critic Eduard Hanslick served as the first president of the DTÖ Society (1893-97) and members of the editorial board have included prominent composers such as Johannes Brahms, Gustav Mahler, and Richard Strauss. The journal Studien zur Musikwissenschaft: Beihefte der Denkmäler der Tonkunst in Österreich (Studies in Musicology: Supplements of the DTÖ) was founded in 1913.

The Denkmäler der Tonkunst in Österreich [Monuments of Music in Austria] is a series of critical editions of historical music, primarily by composers born or working in Austria during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. The Denkmäler der Tonkunst in Österreich (DTÖ) was an initiative of the musicologist Guido Adler who served as its founding General Editor. 



In 1888, the musicologist Guido Adler petitioned the Austrian Ministry of Culture and Education for the publication of a series of editions of historical music (Monumenta Historiae Musices), a project that was to become the DTÖ. Adler became General Editor of the series at a meeting of the Gesellschaft zur Herausgabe von Denkmälern der Tonkunst in Österreich (Society for the Publication of Monuments of Music in Austria) held in 1893, and the first volume of the series appeared in 1894 (Masses by Johann Joseph Fux). Adler served as General Editor from 1893-1938; others who have held the position include Erich Schenk (1939-74) and Othmar Wessely (1974-98). Music critic Eduard Hanslick served as the first president of the DTÖ Society (1893-97) and members of the editorial board have included prominent composers such as Johannes Brahms, Gustav Mahler, and Richard Strauss. The journal Studien zur Musikwissenschaft: Beihefte der Denkmäler der Tonkunst in Österreich (Studies in Musicology: Supplements of the DTÖ) was founded in 1913.

The Denkmäler der Tonkunst in Österreich (DTÖ) has published over 150 volumes and focuses on music beyond the canonical repertoire. Volumes include editions of music from the Trent Codices and works by Heinrich Isaac, Jacobus Vaet, Jacob Handl (or Gallus), Johann Jacob Froberger, Heinrich Ignaz Franz Biber, Johann Heinrich Schmelzer, Georg and Gottlieb Muffat, Antonio Caldara, Johann Ernst Eberlin, Michael Haydn, and Carl Ditters von Dittersdorf. 

Further reading:

(Denkmäler der Tonkunst in Österreich)



(Eybl)



(Fritz)