
Robert Pierre Desnos (1900-1945) was a surrealist French poet whose diverse
work also included scripts for filmand stage, stage and radio scripts;
journalism; essays; advertisements; cantatas; children's fables; and
political tracts. His principle works are of experimental poetry and prose,
though after breaking with the Surrealists he often employed more classical
forms and produced commercial works for radio and newspapers. His preferred
themes include dreams, mythology, and voyages, and especially eroticism and
love. Desnos died in an internment camp in 1945.

From 1922-1927 Desnos contributed regularly to La Rvolution Surreliste
and co-signed collective Surrealist tracts. He showed a gift for hypnogogic
sleep and automatic writing, leading Andr Breton to call him the poet
closest to surrealist truth. His longer surrealist works (Deuil pour
deuil (Mourning for Mourning, 1924) and La Libert ou l'amour! (Liberty or
Love!, 1927)) combine narrative prose and lyric poetry, and involve
extensive linguistic play, such as puns and homonyms. He often illustrated
his own works, or collaborated with artists like Andr Masson, Joan Mir,
and Pablo Picasso.

In the 1920's Desnos wrote for many newspapers, including Paris-Soir. He
also increasingly experimented withwrote in traditional forms like
alexandrines, taken as possibilities available to free verse. In the Second
Manifesto (1929) the Surrealists rejected him for refusing to join the
communist party and the inexcusable failure to understand the current ends
of poetry.

Desnos believed in the total freedom of the poet: Poetry can be this or
that. It does not necessarily have to be this or that...except delirious
and lucid. Eroticism and love were central to his understanding of poetry,
and he devoted many collections to the singer Yvonne George, and later to
his wife Youki. Many of these can be found in two major collections of
poetry: Corps et biens (Body and Goods, 1930) and Fortunes (1942).

Through the 1930's he cultivated his interest in popular culture, finding
inspiration in music, advertising jingles, nursery rhymes, and street
slang. Film scripts like L'toile de mer (The Starfish, 1928), directed by
Man Ray, and numerous successful radio programs also attest to his
enthusiasm for new media.

During World War Two Desnos worked for the anti-censorship review
Aujourd'hui (Today, 1940-44). In 1944, he was arrested by the Gestapo for
his affiliation with the resistance network Agir (Act), and deported to
Nazi work camps. Desnos died of typhoid in a camp in Terezn,
Czechoslovakia, on June 8, 1948.

References and Further Reading:

Breton, Andr. Manifestoes of Surrealism. (1969) Trans. Richard Seaver and
Helen R. Lane. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.

Caws, Mary Anne. The Surrealist Voice of Robert Desnos. (1977). Amherst:
University of Massachusetts Press.

Europe: Revue mensuelle littraire (517-18): 1972. Issue devoted to Desnos.

List of Works:

Desnos: uvres. (1999). Ed. Marie-Claire Dumas. Paris: Gallimard.

----. Mourning for Mourning. (1924) Trans. Terry Hale. The Automatic Muse.
London: Atlas, 1994. 7-59.

----. Liberty or Love! (1927). Trans. Terry Hale. London: Atlas, 1993.

----. The Selected Poems of Robert Desnos. Trans. Carolyn Forch and
Williams Kulik. New York: Ecco, 1991.

