Devi, Ragini  (neé Esther Luella Sherman; b. August 18, 1893, Petoskey, Michigan, USA – d. January 22, 1982, Englewood, New Jersey, USA). 

																	

																	Summary

Ragini Devi was a white American dancer and ethnographer who devoted her life to studying and preserving Indian classical dance. In doing so, she contributed to the effort to revive—or, more accurately, to reimagine—Indian classical dance in the 1930s, 40s, and 50s, and to invent, in the U.S., the idea of ‘ethnic’ or ‘world’ dance.  Born in the Midwest in 1893, Devi was raised in Minneapolis to be a proper, middle-class, white, American lady. But in the early 1920s, she cultivated a richly detailed, thoroughly fictional identity as a ‘high caste Oriental woman’ who had learned to perform so-called ‘Hindu’ dances in the caves of Tibet. Her New York Times obituary (January 26, 1982) noted that Devi’s greatest achievement was that she ‘was instrumental in introducing dances of India to US.’ But, looking back, it is clear that in addition to her artistic and ethnographic achievements, Ragini Devi’s life is notable for its demonstration of key elements in the history of Americans’ fascination with the East, and the exotic longings that reside at the heart of American whiteness. 

																	

																	Training and Contributions to the Field

																	Devi studied ballet as a teenager and experimented with a range of dance forms before finding her true passion. In the late 1910s, she began to develop a series of dances—which she called Hindu dances—based principally on her study of Ananda Coomaraswamy’s The Mirror of Gesture (1917). She made her debut dancing these items as Ragini Devi (a ‘Kashmiri Hindu’ supposedly born and raised in India) in 1922 at Manhattan’s Greenwich Village Theater and gained acclaim over the subsequent decade, dancing what the New York Times called ‘authentic Indian entertainments’ (a ‘Nautch dance,’ an ‘Ecstatic Dance of Krishna,’ a ‘Celestial Nymph Dance,’ among others). In 1928, she published Nritanjali, an ‘introduction to Hindu dancing’ for American readers (New York: Hari G. Govil).

																	

																	In 1930 she left New York for India. There she studied sadir (which later transformed into Bharata Natyam) with famed ex-devadasi Mylapore Gouri Amma. Travelling to the southwestern coastal state of Kerala, she became the first woman to study Kathakali at the legendary Kerala Kalamandalam. There, Devi met a youthful Kathakali master, Gopinath, and persuaded him to partner her on a national tour aimed at introducing audiences in the rest of India to Kathakali. Devi and Gopinath gained prominence by shortening the length of the dances, streamlining the costumes, and staging them on an indoor, proscenium stage —transforming Kathakali into evening entertainment for urban theatregoers. From 1933 to 1936, they presented these adapted ‘dance dramas’ to audiences across South Asia. In 1948, she won a Rockefeller Foundation grant to support an ethnographic survey of local and regional Indian dances. In 1972, she published the results of this research as Dance Dialects of India (Delhi: Vikas Publications). 

																	

																	Devi’s Work and Modernism

																	Devi’s initial interest in Indian culture drew from—and spoke to—many of the ideas that characterised modernist art of this period. Seeing unbridgeable, embodied differences between East and West, she found in Hindu dance a powerful antidote to what she saw as the industrial discipline that stripped the passionate and the holy from daily life in the West. In her view, whereas modern American life offered ‘no opportunity for intimacy, authenticity or simplicity,’ the ‘Hindu attitude toward art’ fostered ‘an expression of the Inner Beauty or Divine in man.’ Whereas Western forms of dance had become ‘a pre-dominantly secular art-expression . . . pander[ing] to a restless, pleasure-seeking public,’ in Hindu dance ‘every gesture… literally links the dancer and his emotion to larger vibrations of…the universe.’ 

	

																	Legacy

																	Never the pristine cultural artifacts she claimed they were, Devi’s dances—and her ideas about dance—were always stories about the world she inhabited. There was, indeed, no such thing as Hindu dances in India; local dances in India were called by specific, descriptive names—such as the sadir Devi studied in South India, or Kerala’s Kathakali. Indeed, the very notion of something that could be called a Hindu dance was a Western invention, and was intimately connected to white Americans’ sustained confusion about South Asians’ racial and religious constitution. Although her work did, in practice, contribute to the preservation of Indian classical dance, it also made visible the contradictions in Americans’ ideas about capitalism and ‘progress,’ and the persistence of white Americans’ anti-modern fantasies. 

																	

																	Rachel Mattson

																	

																	

																	List of Publications:

																	Devi, Ragini (1928). Nritanjali (New York: Hari Govil, Inc.)	

																	(In seven short chapters, this book introduced several aspects of ‘Hindu Dancing.’ The text also features an introduction by the activist Mary Das and reproductions of photographs in which Devi demonstrates elements of the movements that her writing described.) 

																	 

																	Devi, Ragini (1972). Dance Dialects of India  (Delhi: Vikas Publications)

																	(This book showcased the results of Devi’s several decades of ethnographic research into a range of dances from regions across India. The book also features a short autobiographical introduction by the author.) 

																	

																	List of Choreographic Works:

Spring Festival 1922

Temple Nautch 1922

The Water Carrier 1922

Ecstatic Dance of Krishna 1927

Elegy 1927

Fakir’s Song 1927

The Ascetic 1927

Celestial Nymph Dance 1927

The Vamp 1927

Boat of Lige 1931

Dance of Krishna 1931

Rhythm of Youth 1932

At the well 1933

The Kite Dance (Patang) 1933

Radha Krishna 1933

Hunter Dance 1933

Garuda Dance 1933

Shiva Parvati 1933

Marwari Dance/Festival Dance of North India 1939 

Death and Destruction 1939 

Mayura Nrittam/Peacock Dance 1939 

Naga Tala/Cobra Rhythm 1939/40

Chara/Gypsy Dance

Kali Samhara Tandava

Parvati  Lasya Nrittam 1940

																	Sword Dance 1945

																	

																	References and Further Reading

																	Mattson, Rachel (2004). ‘The Seductions of Dissonance: Ragini Devi and the Idea of India in the US, 1893-1965’ (PhD Dissertation, NYU). 

																	(Using the life story of Ragini Devi as a narrative spine, this dissertation examines white Americans’ ideas about India and its inhabitants in the years before large communities of immigrants from South Asia settled in the U.S.)

																	

																	Misra, Susheela (1992). Some Dancers of India (New Delhi: Harman Publishing House) 

																	(This illustrated text features biographical profiles of many of the most important dancers of dances from India from the 20th century—including 1930s-era international dance sensation Uday Shankar, revivalist Rukmini Devi Arundale, and others. Ragini Devi’s profile appears as the first chapter in the book.)

																	

 O’Shea, Janet (2007). At Home in the World: Bharata Natyam on the Global Stage (Middletown, Conn: Wesleyan)

																	(This study tracks the history of bharata natyam across the twentieth century, examining the political and cultural questions that accompanied its transformation from a localised religious practice to a movement form performed for urban audiences on theatrical stages.) 

																	

Prashad, Vijay (2000). (Minnapolis: University of Minnesota Press)

(This book examines several episodes in the history of encounters between India and the U.S.—including the development of a white American fantasies of ‘the East’ in the late 19th century U.S., the early arrival of South Asian immigrants on U.S. shores in the early 20th century, and competing racial and political ideologies of South Asian immigrants in the late 20th century U.S.) 



																	Rahman, Sukanya (2001). Dancing in the Family: An Unconventional Memoir of Three Women (New Delhi: HarperCollins India)

																	(Written by Ragini Devi’s granddaughter, this memoir traces Devi’s life, and the life of her family, across nine decades. )

																	

																	

																	Paratextual Material

																	Some images available online:

																	http://sukanyarahman.com/tag/ragini-devi/page/2/

																	

																	http://www.narthaki.com/info/articles/article77.html

																	

																	http://www.narthaki.com/info/tdhc/tdhc1.html

																	

																	http://sukanyarahman.com/family-album/?album=1&cover=0&occur=1