
Thanom Chapakdee

Dharma Group

The Dharma Group was founded in Thailand in 1971 by a group of mostly self-
taught artists;, with Pratuang Emjareon was elected as leader. The groupps
was formed around the concepts Nature, Art, Truth and Virtue, with members
of the group believing that thesey should be developed and created
inexplored through communication between humanshuman interactions and in
the individual experience of the artist. However, as a result of Thailands
political and social turbulence of the 1970s, set in motion by the student
uprisings of 1973 and 1976, the Dharmma group focused on the need to
develop new ideas that reflected the socio-political context. Influenced by
Socialist Realism, along with other groups they adopted the slogan Art for
Life, Art for the People,  reflecting their beliefs that art and life
should be inseparably linked with one another. This was the first time in
Thailand that where art was produced to express social concerns, rather
than the populist, conservative art produced by the countrys Aacademies.
The Dharma group aimed to express the feelings and struggles of working
people and tried to give them them a voice through visual art. What made it
so important was that it galvanisedutilised self-taught artists in a
movement which really awakened pride in Thai contemporary art circles.,
Even todaywith many art students and art academics passionately
participateing in thee groups activities up until the present.

      Dharma-Nature was the first exhibition of Dharma Group, itwhich took
place in 1971in the E.T.O. building, Klong Teoy port,in 1971. The
exhibition included the groups eleven members including, Pratuang
Emjareon, Supan Krachangpen, Winai Sakchareon, Niti Wattuya, Boonying
Emjareon, Chaiwat Wananon, Pakde Limpong. In 1975, the groups second
exhibition, a conceptual exhibition of new paintings, was held at the Old
Royal Mint. In 1976, the Dharma Group, reflecting their beliefs in Art for
Life, Art for the People, began to exhibit their art to independentlyly
offrom art academic institutions, and thereby acquired great artistic and
political significance. Mostly the works dealt withwere all about
widespread poverty, anti-imperialism, anti-capitalism, homelessness,
suffering and struggles. At this time, several of artists joined thewith
Dharmma Group to show their works at the Bhirasrsi Institute of Modern Art
in Sathorn Road. Works in this exhibition included Pratuang Emjareons
Orchardmans Smile (1976), Seni Stone (1976), Wishes on the Moon (1976),
Chokchai Takphos The Bread (1976), Niti Wattuyas The Buffalow (1976).
The works of and also the works of Thammasak Booncherd, Winai Sakjareon,
Boonying Emjareon, Wirote Nuibutr, Nonthasak Pasaratool, Payab Pundukrut
were also shown. Exhibiting socially engaged works onaround the theme Art
of the People (Silapa Khong Prachachon) was controversial at this volatile
stage in Thailands political history, a stage which reached its apex on
October 6 1976 with the massacre of students at Thammasat University,

After the dramatic changes in Thailands political situation after 1976,
the Dharma Group continued their movement and artistic activities. To the
present day, artists and numerous guest artists have participated in the
Dharma groups activities and the group has remained influential as an
exemplary self-taught artists group for over 40 years.

[pic]

Dharma Groups Symbol

[pic]

Cover of The Third Dharma Group Exhibition, Catalogue in 1976.

References and Further Reading

-----. (1976). Art of the People. (Silpa Khong Prachachon): The Third
Dharma Group Exhibition, (exhibition catalogue in Thai).  Bangkok: Bhorpit.

-----. (1989) Nature and Life: The Dixth Dharma Group Exhibition Bangkok:
Amarin Printing Group.

-----. (1995). Name-Form: The Ninth Dharmma Group Exhibition, Bangkok,
Amarin Printing Group.

Poshyananda,  Apinan. (1992) Modern Art in Thailand : Nineteenth and
Twentieth Centuries. New York: Oxford University Press.

