
Dieste, Eladio (1917-2000)

The  Uruguayan  Engineer  Eladio  Dieste  was  trained  at  the  School   of
Engineering of the University  of  the  Republic  at  Montevideo,  where  he
taught mathematics and mechanics. Approximating modernity  to  a  vernacular
register,  altogether  critical  of  internationalization,  he  worked  with
specific material, economic and social conditions, notably with the  use  of
brick, developing innovative techniques in masonry  construction  that  lead
to the so-called second revolution in  masonry  vaulting.  With  the  firm
Dieste & Montaez, that he founded in 1954,  he  designed  sport-facilities,
warehouses, horizontal silos and other industrial facilities,  two  churches
and his own house, all examples of his most famous motto: there is  nothing
more noble and elegant than resistance through form. Among other texts,  he
published the essays Architecture and Construction, The Awareness  of  Form,
and Art, People, Technocracy, where he analyzed  the  intersections  between
architecture and engineering on the same line used by D. P.  Billington  to
define the idea of structural art, interpretive canon of his work  together
with a rhetoric and aesthetic impulse very much molded upon a strong  Jesuit
tradition.
      By the early  fifties  Dieste  embarked  on  a  radical  criticism  of
modernity,  particularly  as  codified  by  the  International  Style:  both
against the theoretical predominance of the plane and the use of  glass  and
steel. This twofold  critique  led  him  to  experiment  with  non-Euclidian
geometries and the use of reinforced masonry, arguing for the  synchronicity
of form, matter and structure  as  the  programmatic  basis  of  a  socially
engaged practice. Influences of the Catalan vault tradition and the work  of
Gaud that  he  knew  through  the  avant-gardist  painter  Joaqun  Torres
Garca are not hard to trace in  his  work.  Diestes  second  revolution
brought reinforced masonry  to  a  radically  new  territory  by  developing
innovative construction techniques (e.g. pre-stressing of brickwork and  the
use of moveable formworks) and  a  novel  set  of  structural  types:  self-
supporting shells,  double-curvature  vaults  or  Gaussian  vaults,  ruled
surfaces, folded planes, and perforated towers.
      In Architecture and Construction and The  Awareness  of  Form,  Dieste
discusses the relationship between form, matter and structure, stating  that
the first principle is the consistency of what we build with the laws  that
govern matter in equilibrium. To illustrate this, it is useful to  consider
the  complex  structural  solution  used  in  the  self-supporting   shells,
especially in the looped pre-stressing steel bars that absorbs the  negative
bending moments. Case in point is the Barbieri-Leggire gas station, the  Sea
Gull,  Salto  (1976),  one  of  Diestes  most  remarkable  structures:  two
counterbalanced wings acting as a  cantilever  beam.  Here,  the  structural
type is exposed at its most radical economy.
      Structure and infill wall are inseparable in Diestes work:  the  wall
is both structure and  limit,  again  disarticulating  one  of  the  canonic
syntaxes of modern architecture. All of Diestes structural types  could  be
expressed as surfaces that through particular  formal  configurations  adopt
specific structural properties. There is no form but folded  surface,  and
a remarkably thin one. Both in the self-supporting shells and in the double-
curvature vaults, the problem was to manage big spans without  recurring  to
the heavy structures of traditional  systems  most  notably  non-reinforced
masonry. Economy (the use of the least  possible  amount  of  material)  and
structural efficiency (minimizing the impact of the intrinsic weight in  the
static equation) were the two central reasons to  think  of  a  solution  as
thin as possible. It is  therefore  also  in  that  surface  where  Diestes
aesthetic and expressive order emerges more clearly,  being  the  Church  of
Christ the Worker, Atlntida  (1952),  and  Saint  Peters  Church,  Durazno
(1967), the most significant examples. In this project, a  continuous  brick
wall of 32 meters long (from  the  narthex  to  the  presbytery)  is  folded
backwards at the side aisles without any support. Above the access, a  brick
rose window a truly structural and formal tour  de  force  invisible  from
the adjacent plaza, reinforces the scenographic quality of the building  and
confers it its ultimate singularity.
      At the other end of  his  production,  the  industrial  facilities  of
infrastructural scale, is, in addition to several projects in  Uruguay,  the
Porto  Alegre  Central  Market  (CEASA-RS),  Porto  Alegre  (1968-74),  with
architects C. M. Fayet and C. L. Arajo, and the Maintenance Hangar for  the
Metropolitana  (today  MetrRio),  Rio  de  Janeiro  (1971-79).  The  Hangar
comprises 310 self-carrying vaults with longitudinal  spans  of  20  and  23
meters and chords of 7  meters,  totalizing  a  covered  surface  of  nearly
50.000 square meters.
      Diestes idea of the Universal was already at work  at  a  theoretical
level in what he  termed  cosmic  economy,  defined  in  Architecture  and
Construction: the things that we build must have something  that  we  could
call a cosmic economy, that is, to be in accord with the profound  order  of
the world. Dieste distinguishes the cosmic economy  from  the  financial
economy, that he considers as merely monetary adequacy:  while  the  latter
is apparently  practical,  the  former  is  profoundly  practical.  This
cosmic order moves  from  the  particular  to  the  universal,  and  asserts
Diestes search for an ontological ethics of the discipline.




List of works
1952        Church of Christ the Worker, Atlntida, Uruguay
1961-63          Dieste House, Montevideo, Uruguay
1967        Saint Peters Church, Durazno, Uruguay
1968-74     Porto Alegre Central Market, Porto Alegre, Brazil  (with  C.  M.
           Faget and C. L. Arajo)
1971-79          MetrRio Maintenance Hangar, Ro de Janeiro, Brazil
1976        Barbieri-Leggire Gass Station, Salto, Uruguay
1976-78          CADYL Horizontal Silo, Young, Ro Negro

References and further reading
A.A.V.V. (1996)  Eladio  Dieste  1943-1996,  Sevilla:  Consejera  de  Obras
Pblicas y Transportes, Junta de Andaluca.
Anderson, S. (ed.) (2004)  Eladio  Dieste,  Innovation  in  Structural  Art,
Nueva York: Princeton Architectural Press.
Bonta,  J.  P.  (1963)  Eladio  Dieste,  Buenos  Aires:  Instituto  de  Arte
Americano e Investigaciones Estticas.
Carbonell, G. (1987) Eladio Dieste, la estructura cermica, Bogot: Escala.
Cobas,  M.  (2012)  Dieste  Redux,  Mquinas  hacia  un   orden   tectnico
infraestructural, PLOT Arquitectura 10.
Daguerre, M. (ed.) (2003) Eladio Dieste, Milan: Electa.
Dieste, E.  (2011)  Escritos  sobre  arquitectura,  Montevideo:  Irrupciones
Grupo Editor.
Pedreschi,  R.  (2000)   The   Engineers   Contribution   to   Contemporary
Architecture, Eladio Dieste, Londres: Thomas Telford.
Visual Material

[pic]
Church of Christ the Worker, interior, Atlntida, 1952
Source:
http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/5/59/Iglesia_Atl%C3%A1ntida_Di
este_2.jpg

[pic]
Dieste House, Montevideo, 1961-63
Source: http://pablomiranda.es/aetsamen/wp-content/uploads/2013/01/00.jpg

[pic]
Saint Peters Church, interior, Durazno, 1967
Source: http://www.tu-cottbus.de/projekte/uploads/pics/4_28.jpg


[pic]
Saint Peters Church, detail, Durazno, 1967
Source: http://www.mtop.gub.uy/salasaez/dieste/san_pedro1.jpg

[pic]
Porto Alegre Central Market, Porto Alegre, 1968-74
Source: https://benhuser.files.wordpress.com/2012/05/birds-eye-view-150.jpg

[pic]
MetrRio Maintenance Hangar, Ro de Janeiro, 1971-79
Source:            http://www.revistaplot.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/07/6.-
Dieste_11.jpg







[pic]
CADYL Horizontal Silo during construction, Young, Ro Negro, 1976-78
Source: http://www.mtop.gub.uy/salasaez/dieste/silo1.jpg


