
Doesburg, Theo van (1883-1931)

Theo van Doesburg was a Dutch painter, designer and art theorist.  As the
founder and major polemicist of the avant-garde movement known as DE STIJL
(The Style), he was instrumental in developing an abstract style based on
primary colours and geometry.  Tirelessly promoting De Stijl across Europe,
van Doesburg played a crucial role in the development of Modernist art,
architecture and design in the first half of the twentieth century.

[pic]

Theo van Doesburg in the Caf de lAubette, Strasbourg, 1927

http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/1/17/Theo_van_Doesburg_in_Aube
tte.jpg

Born Christian Emil Marie Kpper in Utrecht, van Doesburg was the son of
the photographer Wilhelm Kpper.  His pseudonym was developed from the name
of his stepfather, Theodorus Doesburg, whom he regarded as his natural
father.  Van Doesburg became a painter around 1900.  His early work was
influenced by POST-IMPRESSIONISM and FAUVISM, but in 1915 he discovered the
work of PIET MONDRIAN and underwent a profound transition.  Mondrian had
developed an austere visual style based on primary colours and orthogonal
grids.  This convinced van Doesburg to pursue spiritual harmony based on
mathematical order.

Van Doesburg and Mondrian founded the avant-garde art magazine De Stijl in
1917.  Inspired by the mystical ideas of Theosophy, they sought an art of
pure abstraction, which Mondrian later termed Neo-Plasticism.  Van Doesburg
had a magnetic personality and was adept at gaining support.  The designer
GERRIT RIETVELD was among the first to demonstrate how De Stijl could be
extrapolated from the flat canvass to three-dimensional design objects and
spaces.

Van Doesburg acted as the figurehead and international ambassador of De
Stijl.  He lectured intermittently at the BAUHAUS from 1922 to 1923 and his
teaching encouraged Bauhaus designers to move away from their early
Expressionistic and craft-based aesthetic towards pure geometric
simplicity.  After meeting the artist Kurt Schwitters, van Doesburg
developed an interest in the provocative DADA movement.  Using the alias
I.K. Bonset (from the Dutch Ik ben sot  I am a fool), he exhibited as a
Dada artist in Holland and published four issues of the Dada art review
Mcano (19223).

In 1923 van Doesburg moved to Paris, which brought him into closer contact
with Mondrian.  Tensions between the two began to emerge, particularly
concerning the use of diagonals.  Van Doesburg insisted on the dynamic
effect of diagonals as a necessary antithesis to the calculated harmony of
Mondrians compositions.  He named his new approach Elementarism and
articulated it in a manifesto published in De Stijl in 1926.

Van Doesburg applied his talents to architecture and interior design.  He
created colour schemes, stained glass and tiled floors for houses designed
by Jan Wils and J.J.P. OUD, reiterating the basic iconography of primary
colours and pure geometric form.  Between 1926 and 1928 he was engaged with
the renovation of the Caf de lAubette in Strasbourg, a collaboration with
Hans Arp and Sophie Taeuber-Arp.  Van Doesburg designed interiors
consisting of rectangular panes of colour held in balance by the
architectural framework.  The completed design was greeted with little
enthusiasm and was soon dismantled.  It was, however, reconstructed in the
1990s and remains the most complete expression of Elementarist principles.
[pic]
A reconstruction of the cinema-dance hall at the Caf de lAubette in
Strasbourg, designed by Theo van Doesburg, 1926-8.
http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/e/e6/Cin%C3%A9-
dancing_Strasbourg_-_Theo_van_Doesburg060611_006.jpg
Van Doesburg remained active in art groups such as Cercle et Carr and Art
Concret.  He designed a house and studio for his own occupation at Meudon
outside Paris (1929-31).  A meeting here in 1931 led to the formation of
Abstraction-Cration, a group that advocated pure abstraction.  Van
Doesburg moved to Davos in Switzerland due to ill health, but died of a
heart attack on 7 March 1931.

List of works
De maskers af!, 1916.
De schilder De Winter en zijn werk, 1916.
De nieuwe beweging in de schilderkunst, 1917.
Drie voordrachten over de nieuwe beeldende kunst, 1919.
Klassiek-Barok-Modern, 1920.
Wat is Dada?, 1923.
Grundbegriffe der neuen gestaltenden Kunst, 1925.

References and further reading
Baljeu, J. (1974) Theo van Doesburg. London: Studio Vista.  (A
comprehensive monograph that analyses van Doesburgs role as the editor of
De Stijl and includes translations of his key writings).
Doesburg, T.V. (1983) Het andere gezicht van I.K. Bonset: literaire
geschriften van Theo van Doesburg, I.K. Bonset en Aldo Camini, Amsterdam:
Meulenhoff.  (A collection of untranslated writings by van Doesburg,
including those published under his pseudonyms I.K. Bonset and Aldo
Camini).
Doig, A. (1986) Theo van Doesburg: painting into architecture, theory into
practice. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.  (This text explores van
Doesburgs philosophy, architecture and painting).

Fabre, G.C., Wintgens Hotte, D. and White, M. (2009) Van Doesburg and the
International Avant-Garde: constructing a new world. London: Tate.  (This
important text was the first to study van Doesburgs influence throughout
Europe and beyond, evaluating his role in the development of Modernist art,
architecture and design).

Hedrick, H.L. (1979) Theo van Doesburg, Propagandist and Practitioner of
the Avant-Garde, 1909-1923. Ann Arbor, Mich.: UMI Research Press.  (An
analysis of van Doesburgs essays and poems, many of which were originally
published in De Stijl).
Hoek, E., Blokhuis, M., Goovaerts, I. and Kamphuys, N. et al. (2000) Theo
van Doesburg: Oeuvre Catalogus, Utrecht: Centraal Museum. (A Dutch-language
catalogue of works by van Doesburg).
Leering, J. and Straaten, E. (1983) Theo van Doesburg, 1883-1931: een
documentaire op basis van materiaal uit de schenking van Moorsel.
Gravenhage: Staatsuitgeverij.  (A Dutch-language text containing extracts
from van Doesburgs diary).



