Taylor & Francis – Encyclopedia of Modernism



About you

[Salutation]

Tina

[Middle name]

Sherwell



[Enter your biography]



International Academy of Art Palestine



Your article

Dweik, Taleb (1952--)

[Enter any variant forms of your headword – OPTIONAL]

Taleb Dweik was born in 1952 in Jerusalem and studied art at the Hilwan University in Cairo. He was known for his paintings of the Palestinian landscape, in particular his picturesque and decorative images of the Holy City of Jerusalem executed in a painterly style combining impressionism and expressionism. His work characteristically removed traces of the hardship of the occupation of the city, and instead explored the beauty of its landscape and historical sites. He participated in group exhibitions locally and internationally, including the Sharjah Biennale, in the United Arab Emirates, in 1995 and 2003. He was the president of the Palestinian League of Artists from 1990 to 1996, and was the Dean of the faculty of fine arts at Al-Quds University from 2001 to 2003. He held the position of inspector for fine arts education in Jerusalem, and published a book on art education for secondary level students. From 2000 onwards he explored mixed media techniques and collage, investigating relationships between the land, heritage, and childhood. In particular, he adopted a child-like style in his paintings to represent ideal images of the city filled with innocence and spontaneity, erasing traces of the harshness of occupation, and creating a city of bliss, beauty, and utopia.

Taleb Dweik was born in 1952 in Jerusalem and studied art at the Hilwan University in Cairo. He was known for his paintings of the Palestinian landscape, in particular his picturesque and decorative images of the Holy City of Jerusalem executed in a painterly style combining impressionism and expressionism. His work characteristically removed traces of the hardship of the occupation of the city, and instead explored the beauty of its landscape and historical sites. He participated in group exhibitions locally and internationally, including the Sharjah Biennale, in the United Arab Emirates, in 1995 and 2003. He was the president of the Palestinian League of Artists from 1990 to 1996, and was the Dean of the faculty of fine arts at Al-Quds University from 2001 to 2003. He held the position of inspector for fine arts education in Jerusalem, and published a book on art education for secondary level students. From 2000 onwards he explored mixed media techniques and collage, investigating relationships between the land, heritage, and childhood. In particular, he adopted a child-like style in his paintings to represent ideal images of the city filled with innocence and spontaneity, erasing traces of the harshness of occupation, and creating a city of bliss, beauty, and utopia.



Dweik participated in group exhibitions in Syria (1989), Japan (1992, 2000), Germany (1992), Spain (1993), the U.S.A. (1994), Canada (1996), Belgium (1996), the United Arab Emirates (1998), at the United Nations Headquarters in New York (1999), and in Tunisia and Morocco (2000). His work is held in many private collections. He collaborated with Dr. Sylvie Mansour on her book, Eye Witness to an Invasion. He was given the first prize at the Palestine Ecological Exhibition in Jerusalem in 1986 and at the ‘Jesus in the Palestinian Context’ exhibition at Dar Annadwa in Bethlehem in 2003. He received honorary certificates from the Welfare Association, the League of Arab Doctors, the Jerusalem Committee, the Haya Cultural Centre, and from the Sharjah Biennale. 

Further reading:

(Ali)



(Ankori)



 (Boullata) 



(Shammout)



(Sherwell)