Taylor & Francis – Encyclopedia of Modernism



About you

[Salutation]

Mara

[Middle name]

Santi



[Enter your biography]



Ghent University



Your article

d’Annunzio, Gabriele (1863—1938)

[Enter any variant forms of your headword – OPTIONAL]

Gabriele d’Annunzio, Italian poet, novelist, short story writer, dramatist, journalist, essayist and scriptwriter, was a leading Italian author in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. Since 1914, he also played an active role in Italian politics and became a national war hero and ideologist of the nationalists. His nonconformist model of aesthetic life (life as a work of art), his successful literary career, his political engagement in the Great War, and even his scandalous affairs, surrounded his life with a legendary aura and contributed to making him one of the most striking personalities of the period in Italy, where he was and still is called, by antonomasia, the ‘Vate’ (the Bard). 

Gabriele d’Annunzio, Italian poet, novelist, short story writer, dramatist, journalist, essayist and scriptwriter, was a leading Italian author in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. Since 1914, he also played an active role in Italian politics and became a national war hero and ideologist of the nationalists. His nonconformist model of aesthetic life (life as a work of art), his successful literary career, his political engagement in the Great War, and even his scandalous affairs, surrounded his life with a legendary aura and contributed to making him one of the most striking personalities of the period in Italy, where he was and still is called, by antonomasia, the ‘Vate’ (the Bard). 



Affirming literature’s capability of influencing life style, he conditioned Italian language, fashion and everyday life, throughout a rhetorical-ideological model, of which he himself was the living embodiment, the so called Dannunzianism. He was a writer of international acclaim and it has often been argued that he led Italian culture out of its provincialism by merging international innovative cultural fin de siècle tendencies, such as naturalism, aestheticism and symbolism, with Italy’s national literary tradition and its Latin and old Greek roots. In his works d’Annunzio tried to offer Italy a cultural model, innovatively embedded in national tradition and determining the development of national post-unitary identity. 



Near the end of his life d’Annunzio supervised the publication of his works (1927-1936), undertaken by the Government and published in 49 volumes divided into four sections: poetry (Versi d’amore e di gloria), dramas (Tragedie, sogni, misteri), novels and short stories (Prose di romanzi), and other texts (Prose di ricerca, di lotta, di comando, di conquista, di tormento, d’indovinamento, di rinnovamento, di celebrazione, di rivendicazione, di liberazione, di favole, di giochi, di baleni). He presented this ultimate collection as his literary legacy to the nation, which also received the Vittoriale degli Italiani, d’Annunzio’s monumental auto-celebrative private house. Incredibly gifted, especially as a poet, he wrote absolute masterpieces such as Il piacere (The Child of Pleasure, 1898) where he introduces the leitmotiv of the superiority of the artist; Alcyone (1904), third book of the Laudi del cielo del mare della terra e degli eroi (In Praise of Sky, Sea, Earth, and Heroes), which represents his sensual perception of the world and the artist’s attempt to communicate with the divine essence of nature; and Notturno (Nocturnei, 1921) the anti-novel of d’Annunzio’s war (from its beginning to Fiume). D’Annunzio believed that literature was the verbalization of the divine heart of nature and saw the artist as the living expression of this nature. D’Annunzio’s work anticipates Italian modernism, yet unlike many modernist writers in Italy it still conceives art as a closed epistemological system and postulates an active role of the artist who rules and explains the world.



List of Works

d’Annunzio, Gabriele (1927-1936), Tutte le opere di Gabriele d’Annunzio, Milano: Mondadori.

Further reading:

 (d’Annunzio)

(d’Annunzio, Tutte le novelle)

(d’Annunzio, Prose di romanzi)

(d’Annunzio, Scritti giornalistici)

(d’Annunzio, Prose di ricerca)