
Ecole suprieure des Beaux-Arts de lIndochine


      The Ecole suprieure des Beaux-Arts de lIndochine in Hanoi was opened
in 1924 by the French government  with  the  aim  of  training  artists  and
teachers of drawing. The introduction of modern  painting  in  Vietnam  took
place in a colonial context. The curriculum was supposed to combine  Western
art with Far-Eastern traditions, with the teaching modelled on that  of  the
Ecole des Beaux-Arts in Paris. Topics taught there included:  life  drawing,
linear perspective, open-air painting and oil painting, all  of  which  were
new  for  Vietnamese  students  and  completely  different  from  their  own
tradition. The school also taught Far Eastern art  history  and  techniques,
such as silk painting and lacquer painting.  Those Vietnamese  painters  who
chose oil painting accepted a completely new medium. With this  new  medium,
the French artists introduced the  Western  aesthetic  of  modern  painting:
linear perspective, imitation of nature and modelling  in  the  round.  This
way of painting was new regarding  the  Vietnamese  way  of  thinking  which
usually worked with conventions and symbols, without  being  concerned  with
reality. The schools first students, including T Ngc Vn or Trn Vn  Cn
tried to mix what they had just learned with what  they  already  knew  from
their own tradition.


      The French took power in Indochina by the  second  half  of  the  19th
century. From  the  beginning  of  the  20th  century  onwards,  the  French
government  promoted  Indochinese  civilizations  and  their  traditions  in
creating a teaching structure to support the arts. Schools were  established
for the applied  arts  with  French  and  Indochinese  teachers,  where  the
teaching took into consideration regional traditions. These  schools  opened
at Thu Dau Mot, Bien Hoa, Gia Dinh  (Cochinchine),  Phnom  Penh  (Cambodia),
Vientiane (Laos), Hanoi, Haiphong  (Tonkin)  and  Hue  (Annam).  These  were
followed by the opening of Ecole suprieure des Beaux-Arts de lIndochine.
      Victor Tardieu, an academic and naturalist painter  who  travelled  to
Indochina in 1921 after being awarded the Prix  Indochine  (1920),  was  the
founder and the first director of  the  school.  After  Tardieus  death  in
1938, Evariste  Jonchre,  a  painter  and  a  sculptor  who  produced  very
powerful works, became the schools director until 1945. He was awarded  the
Prix Indochine in 1932. Nguyn Nam Sn played a  large  role  in  the  early
years of the school, which was quite rare for an Indochinese person.  Having
received a bi-cultural education, he  first helped  Victor  Tardieu  in  his
task of creating the school and then  taught  decorative  art  until  around
1945, where he also helped greatly  in  organising  traditional  Indochinese
instruction in the curriculum. His art was academic, realistic and  full  of
expression.
      The French painter, Joseph Inguimberty received an assignment from the
French government in 1925, stayed in Indochina  until  1945,  and  became  a
popular teacher. He enjoyed  painting  outdoors  with  his  students,  often
sketching peasants at  work.  He  painted  large  oils  on  canvass  in  his
workshop from plein-air oil sketches, deploying linear  perspective,  simple
forms, flat coloured areas  (green  and  ochre)  and  bold  black  outlines.
Inguimberty is now famous for the role  he  played  in  the  development  of
lacquer painting in Vietnam. As a result of his efforts  together  with  the
Vietnamese artists who adopted the medium, lacquer painting progressed  from
an artisan technique to an artistic one.
    Andr Maire travelled twice to Indochina. The first time from  1919  to
1921 as a serviceman and drawing teacher at the Saigons Lyce;  the  second
time from 1948 to 1958 as a drawing teacher  at  the  Ecole  dArchitecture,
which was part of the Ecole suprieure des Beaux-Arts de lIndochine,  first
at Dalat (1926), then at Saigon (1950). His example reflects the  change  in
the French colonial artists style between the two World Wars. The works  of
his first stay were mainly oil  paintings,  with  naturalistic  compositions
and colours. However, when he travelled to Indochina for  the  second  time,
he gained more maturity in his artistic work preferring to use  gouache  and
red chalk, showing stylistic daring in his choice of colours.
    Nguyn Phan Chnh, L Ph and Mai Trung  Th  were  students  from  the
first year of the Ecole suprieure des Beaux-Arts  de  lIndochine  and  are
all famous for their skilful silk paintings.  Like  silk,  lacquer  painting
was a specifically  Vietnamese  artistic  means  of  expression.  While  the
Chinese and the Japanese also used lacquer painting, they employed  it  only
for decorative purposes. After the 1930s, the  Vietnamese  students  of  the
Ecole suprieure des Beaux-Arts de lIndochine tried to go  further  and  to
develop the potential of this traditional technique.  Nguyn  Gia  Tr,  who
passed the exam in 1936, played an essential part in  this  revival.  Nguyn
Gia Trs primary aim with regards the lacquer  medium  was  to  obtain  the
same level of painting as oils, with regards perspective, modelling  in  the
round and infinite variation of colours. Thanks  to  his  research  on  what
pigments could  be  used  with  lacquer,  the  range  of  colours  increased
greatly, whilst the rubbing down and the  polishing  of  the  lacquer  board
also increased nuances and produced a better finish.
      Through the Ecole suprieure des Beaux-Arts de lIndochine, Vietnamese
artists were introduced to modern  art,  new  aesthetics  and  mediums.  The
processes that they adopted from French avant-garde movements  were  not  in
opposition to traditional art forms, but tended to renew  them.  Perspective
was included but rarely realistic, the artist  preferring  the  intimacy  of
closed space  and  composition  was  synthetic,  reflecting  popular  works.
Vietnamese artists were also adept at using flat colours and forms  obtained
uniquely by single accentuated strokes, in the style of calligraphy.
      The first artists trained by the Ecole suprieure  des  Beaux-Arts  de
lIndochine  developed  a  modern  figurative  art  which  derived  from  an
idealisation  of  everyday  life.  Following  the  Second  World   War   and
decolonization, these artists found inspiration elsewhere. Many  left  Hanoi
and went into to the wilderness. They  mixed  daily  with  peasants,  ethnic
minorities and village folk. Their quest for  a  cultural  identity  may  be
explained in the context of Vietnams  nationalist  policy  as  a  means  of
establishing its independence.
      The former Ecole suprieure des Beaux-Arts  de  lIndochine  had  seen
some changes due to the war and the imposition of the official  ideology  of
Socialist Realism by a Communist power  but  the  Vietnamese  authority  has
never  disowned  the  schools  students,   teachers,  directors  or  famous
artists. Researchers and Vietnamese contemporary painters  all  agreed  that
the school gave Vietnamese art and  artists  a  new  place  in  society  and
allowed the introduction of modern art in Vietnam.

References and Further Reading

------- (2012) Du Fleuve Rouge au  Mkong,  Visions  du  Vit  Nam,  Paris:
Paris Muses, Editions Finlay.

------- (2009) Essays on Modern and Contemporary Vietnamese Art,  Singapore:
Singapore Art Museum.

-------  (1990)  Trng  i  hc  M  thut  H  Ni,  1925-1990,   LEcole
suprieure des Beaux-Arts de Hanoi, H Ni: 1990.
