
The Eight (Osma, or Die Acht)
Eleanor Moseman, Colorado State University
Nicholas Sawicki, Lehigh University

Known in Czech as Osma and in German as Die Acht, the Eight was an artistic
association at the forefront of the modern movement in Prague in the early
twentieth century.  It made a pivotal contribution to the development of
post-impressionism, expressionism, and cubism in the Czech lands of the
Habsburg Empire (Bohemia and Moravia), and first garnered attention through
its exhibitions of 1907 and 1908.   Bilingual in composition, the group
included the artists Vincenc Bene, Friedrich Feigl, Emil Filla, Max Horb,
Otakar Kubn, Bohumil Kubita, Willi Nowak, Emil Artur Pittermann-Longen,
Antonn Prochzka, and Linka Prochzkov.  Other associations with the same
name formed in Budapest and New York, but the Eight was the first to adopt
the naming.

The nucleus of the Eight coalesced at the Academy of Fine Arts in Prague,
where the majority of the groups artists trained.  Dissatisfied with the
prevailing mode of academic realism in the schools painting program and
the conservative outlook of their teachers, many of the artists quit or
were ejected from their studies.  These departures precipitated the
formation of the group, which took its name from the number of participants
in its first exhibition.  The exhibition opened in April 1907 in a rented
storefront in Prague, and was followed by a second exhibition in June-July
1908 at the Topi Salon, a prominent local art gallery.  Breaking with the
local custom of artists showing their work with established artistic
institutions, the two exhibitions were independently organized and promoted
by the Eight, and they showcased the groups rupture with academic
tradition.

The founding members of the Eight gradually replaced academic naturalism
with a loose, expressive treatment of line invested with psychological
intensity, and colour imbued with symbolic meaning.  Their subjects
included portraits; landscapes and city scenes; religious, mythological,
and literary imagery; still lifes; and genre scenes depicting modern lifes
labour and amusements.  The style of their work was reminiscent of the art
of Paul Czanne, Paul Gauguin, Henri Matisse, Edvard Munch, and Vincent Van
Gogh, which the Eight followed closely.  Early exposure to Auguste Rodins
sculpture and especially Munchs paintings through exhibitions in Prague
(1902 and 1905 respectively) set the artists of the Eight on their
expressive trajectory.   Reviews of the latter exhibitions and commentaries
on art from abroad by Czech critics and art historians were regularly
published in the Prague art journal Voln smry (Free Directions), and had
a decisive impact on the Eight. The journal was published by the Mnes
Association, a progressive Czech organization for artists where several
members of the Eight later sought membership.

The painted imagery of the Eight exposed the dissolution of belief in
stability among a populace weary of Habsburg rule. Ethnic, religious, and
class tensions visible in contemporary Prague often manifested in the art
world in the form of separate exhibition groups based on language. Outright
violence occasionally erupted between mobs of Czech- and German-speakers,
as the fissures in a decadent empire began to show. In contrast to this
divisiveness, however, the Eight radically brought together artists of both
Czech and German backgrounds, Christian as well as Jewish.

Local audiences and critics were scandalized by the groups mixed ethnic
composition, and perceived the art of the Eight as a threat to academic
conventions.  The two exhibitions that the Eight organized were beset by
negative reviews.  Even the progressive-minded brothers Josef and Karel
apek published a mixed response, which criticized the paintings amorphous
quality and commented on the Eight artists eye for colour and light along
with their ability to evoke the spiritual. The group nevertheless found
support for its efforts, most notably from within the Prague literary
world, and from critics such as Max Brod and Frantiek X. alda. Brod wrote
the first major article on the Eight, a response to the groups inaugural
exhibition titled Frhling in Prag (Spring in Prague, 1907).

The Eight maintained close contact with gallerists and artists in Berlin,
Vienna, and Paris, including Paul Cassirer, Julius Meier-Graefe, and the
Brcke in Germany, as well as Henri Matisse and Andr Derain in Paris. In
1910 the Eight helped organize the Prague debut of Derain and Matisse, as
well as Georges Braque, at an exhibition hosted by the Mnes Association
and titled Les Indpendants, which first brought key examples of Parisian
post-impressionist and cubist painting to local attention.  The Eight
gradually dissolved that same year.  Several of its members reunited in
1911 to establish the Group of Fine Artists (Skupina vtvarnch umlc),
widely represented in scholarship as a successor to the Eight.

References and Further Reading

Andl, Jaroslav, et al. Czech Modernism, 1900-1945, exh. cat. Houston
Museum of Fine Arts (Boston: Bulfinch Press, 1989).

Benson, Timothy O. and va Forgcs, eds. Between Worlds: A Sourcebook of
Central European Avant-Gardes, 1910-1930 (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press,
2002).

Brod, Max.  Frhling in Prag.  Die Gegenwart (18 May 1907), 316-317.

Clegg, Elizabeth.  Art, Design, and Architecture in Central Europe, 1890-
1920.  New Haven: Yale University Press, 2006.

Lama, Miroslav. Osma a Skupina vtvarnch umlc, 1907-1917 (Prague:
Odeon, 1988).

Mansbach, Steven A. Modern Art in Eastern Europe: From the Baltic to the
Balkans, ca. 1890-1939 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999).

Padrta, Ji with Miroslav Lama. Osma a Skupina vtvarnch umlc  1907-
1917: Teorie, kritika, polemika (Prague: Odeon, 1992).

Pomajzlov, Alena, ed. Expresionismus a esk umn 1905-1927
[Expressionism and Czech Art] (Prague: Nrodn Galerie, 1994).

Sawicki, Nicholas.  The Critic as Patron and Mediator: Max Brod, Modern
Art, and Jewish Identity in Early Twentieth-Century Prague.  Images: A
Journal of Jewish Art and Visual Culture 6 (2012), 30-51.

Sawicki, Nicholas.  Na cest kmodernosti: Umleck sdruen Osma a jeho
okruh vletech 1900-1910.  Prague: Filozofick fakulta Univerzity Karlovy,
2014.

Relevant Websites

National Gallery in Prague, Collection of 19th and 20th-century art
http://www.ngprague.cz/en/5/sekce/veletrzni-palace/ (significant number of
works by the Eight artists)

The Gallery of West Bohemia in Pilsen
http://www.zpc-galerie.cz/cs/collections (works by artists of the Eights
generation)

Museum of Modern Art in Olomouc
http://www.olmuart.cz/MMU/ (works by artists of the Eights generation)

Topi Salon in Prague
http://www.topicuvsalon.cz/index.php?option=com_content&view=category&layout
=blog&id=50&Itemid=89 (site of 2nd exhibition of the Eight, 1908)

History of S.V.U. Mnes (1887-2007)
http://www.svumanes.cz/ospolku.html (from a documentary exhibition; text by
Jindich Boeck, Lucie Gorov, and Vclav pale)

Suggested images

[pic]
Bohumil Kubita, Promenda u Arna (Promenade on the Arno), 1907, oil on
board. Gallery of West Bohemia in Pilsen. Image in the public domain.


[pic]
Max Horb, Platz in Mnchen (Square in Munich), 1907, oil on canvas.  Shown
at the first exhibition of the Eight, 1907.  National Gallery, Prague.
Image in the public domain.


[pic]
Broadside catalogue of the first exhibition of the Eight, Prague, 1907.
Image in the public domain.




