
Ellington, Duke
Dustin Garlitz

Duke Ellington was an American jazz composer, pianist, and big-band leader.
 Ellington wrote over 1000 compositions in his musical career, which
spanned the JAZZ AGE of the 1920s, with engagements at notable New York
City nightclubs from the era such as the Cotton Club in Harlem, to the
swing jazz of the 1930s and 1940s and its big-band culture of performance
halls, including the Savoy Ballroom.  Moving from his native Washington,
D.C. and settling permanently in New York City in the 1920s, Ellington soon
became one of the leading musical figures in the HARLEM RENAISANCE.  In the
1960s, once AVANT-GARDE jazz had emerged in full, he recorded in quartet
and trio settings with high modernists JOHN COLTRANE and CHARLES MINGUS for
full length studio albums, and continued to tour the world with his own
Orchestra through the 1970s.  Giddins and DeVeaux (2009) argue that
Ellingtons compositions, which total over 1000, have been the most
performed pieces in jazz written by any one composer.

      Duke Ellington, born Edward Kennedy Ellington on April 29, 1899 in
Washington, D.C., began studying piano at age seven.  Ellington relocated
to New York City as part of the Great Migration and became a prominent
musical figure in the HARLEM RENAISSANCE.  In the Jazz Age of the 1920s,
Ellington and his band held a performance engagement at the notable Cotton
Club in HARLEM.  In the mid 1920s he began recording music with his
Orchestra.  Some of his influential musical compositions written in the
1920s include the ballads Mood Indigo, Sophisticated Lady, and In a
Sentimental Mood.  His 1931 up-tempo composition It Dont Mean a Thing
(If It Aint Got That Swing) became a piece popular for Big Bangs to play
in the Swing Jazz movement of the 1930s.  Ellingtons jazz symphony Black,
Brown and Beige (1943), composed for his first performance at Carnegie
Hall, represented a modernist musical work that engaged Civil Rights
activism and the mid twentieth century African American experience.
Ellingtons composition Black and Tan Fantasy (1929) formed the basis of
a short film of the same title, and was accompanied there by actors,
dancers, and artists.  The film, which featured Ellingtons Orchestra in
performance at the Cotton Club, came to characterize the HARLEM RENAISSANCE
and its contributions to the visual and performing arts.  Ellington made a
lasting impression on a variety of visual artists, writers and performers
in modernism across the arts.  A ballet was adapted to one of his
compositional works.

      Ellington partnered with arranger Billy Strayhorn, a partnership that
lasted the span of three decades and generated a vast body of orchestral
work that was distinctly modernist in its jazz-orientation.  Examples of
musical works generated from such artistic partnership were Take the A
Train.  Ellington composed the soundtrack to a film in France and became a
cultural ambassador of Americas modern music, traveling overseas
extensively with his Orchestra where he diplomatically promoted jazz in
regions such as Soviet Russia during the Cold War.  He partnered with
international figures in modern music such as Juan Tizol to perform the
jazz composition Caravan, which he recorded with his Orchestra, and that
featured a melody with a distinctly Mediterranean sound.  He died on May
24, 1974 in New York City, at age 75.  Ellington was posthumously awarded a
Pulitzer Prize Special Citation in 1999, the centennial of his birth, in
recognition of his musical genius, aesthetically evoking the principles of
democracy via jazz, and for making significant contributions to modern
culture and the arts.

References and Further Readings:

Appel, A., Jr. (2004) Jazz Modernism: From Ellington and Armstrong to
Matisse and Joyce, New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

Dance, S. (2000) The World of Duke Ellington, New York: Da Capo Press.

Edwards, B.H. (2002) The Literary Ellington, Representations 77 (1): pp.
1-29.

Giddins, G. and S. DeVeaux (2009) Jazz, New York and London: W.W. Norton.

Gleason, R.J. (1995) Celebrating the Duke, New York: Da Capo Press.

Hasse, J.E. (1995) Beyond Category: The Life and Genius of Duke Ellington,
New York: Da Capo Press.

Lambert, E. (1998) Duke Ellington: A Listeners Guide, New York: Scarecrow
Press.

Lawrence, A.H. (2003) Duke Ellington and His World: A Biography, New York:
Routledge.

Lincoln, J.C. (1987) Duke Ellington, New York: Oxford University Press.

Nicholson, S. (1999) Reminiscing in Tempo: A Portrait of Duke Ellington,
Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press.

Schiff, D. (2012) The Ellington Century, Berkeley and Los Angeles, CA:
University of California Press.

Steed, J.T., (1999) Duke Ellington: A Spiritual Biography, New York: The
Crossroad Publishing Company.

Timner, W.E. (2007) Ellingtonia: The Recorded Music of Duke Ellington and
His Sideman, New York: Scarecrow Press.

Tucker, M., (ed.), (1993) The Duke Ellington Reader, New York: Oxford
University Press.

Tucker, M., (1995) Ellington: The Early Years, Urbana and Chicago:
University of Illinois Press.

Autobiography:

Ellington, D. (1973) Music is My Mistress, New York: Da Capo Press.

Dustin Garlitz
University of South Florida

