Taylor & Francis – Encyclopedia of Modernism



About you

[Salutation]

Sarah

[Middle name]

Dwider



[Enter your biography]



University of North Texas



Your article

Enani, Salah (b. 1955, Egypt)

[Enter any variant forms of your headword – OPTIONAL]

Salah Enani is best known for his painted compositions, which depict playfully rendered figures that have exaggerated caricatured features. His works often present recognisable Egyptian cultural figures such as Umm Kulthum and Naguib Mahfouz. Salah Enani was trained at the Faculty of Art Education in Cairo and graduated with a bachelor’s degree in 1977. Early in his career, Enani worked as a commercial illustrator, which significantly influenced his painting style. After shifting to working as a painter, Salah Enani served as an instructor at the Faculty of Arts Education at Helwan University in Cairo. As an artist, Enani represented Egypt at the 1986 Netenberg Drawing Biennale in Germany as well as the Egyptian Cultural Week held in Sharjah in 2000. His work is included in the permanent collection of the Museum of Egyptian Modern Art in Cairo. 

Salah Enani is best known for his painted compositions, which depict playfully rendered figures that have exaggerated caricatured features. His works often present recognisable Egyptian cultural figures such as Umm Kulthum and Naguib Mahfouz. Salah Enani was trained at the Faculty of Art Education in Cairo and graduated with a bachelor’s degree in 1977. Early in his career, Enani worked as a commercial illustrator, which significantly influenced his painting style. After shifting to working as a painter, Salah Enani served as an instructor at the Faculty of Arts Education at Helwan University in Cairo. As an artist, Enani represented Egypt at the 1986 Netenberg Drawing Biennale in Germany as well as the Egyptian Cultural Week held in Sharjah in 2000. His work is included in the permanent collection of the Museum of Egyptian Modern Art in Cairo. 

Further reading:

(Engelstad)



(Salah Mohamed Enani)