
Fascist Modernism

FASCIST MODERNISM is an artistic and literary movement emphasizing extreme
nationalism, romantic anti-capitalism, and cultural renewal most closely
associated with Fascist Italy, Vichy France, and National Socialist Germany
(see NAZI MODERNISM), but also describes the fusion of innovative literary
technique and reactionary politics found in the writings of leading
American, English, and Irish Modernist authors such as T.S. Eliot, D.H.
Lawrence, Wyndham Lewis, Ezra Pound, Gertrude Stein, and W.B. Yeats.

Fascist Italy
In founding FUTURISM in 1909, Filippo Tommaso MARINETTI called for
incendiary violence that would rouse Italy from its complacent nostalgia
and destroy all of the cultural institutionsmuseums, monuments, and
universitiesthat stank of the past. Marinetti challenged the youth of
the nation to reject a debilitating identification with the glories of
ancient Rome and instead to work for the realization of a new Italy that
was thoroughly industrialized and bristling with skyscrapers, aeroplanes,
and automobiles of eternal and omnipresent velocity. He sang the praises
of the hygiene of war, invoked the beauty of battle, and insisted upon
the primacy of emotion and intuition over ratiocination and bourgeois
morality. Futurism asserted an aesthetic of speed, violence, and
iconoclasm. In 1923 Marinetti hailed the coming to power of Mussolinis
Fascist Party as the realization of the minimum Futurist program, which
he described as embodying every day heroism, love of danger, violence
rehabilitated as a decisive argument, the glorification of war, sole
hygiene of the world, the religion of speed, of novelty, optimism,
originality, and the intervention of the young at a time of grave crisis
in the life of the nation. Leading Italian artists associated with FASCIST
MODERNISM, whose work was distinguished by a neo-classical, at times
monumentalist return to order, and who contributed to the 1932 Exhibition
of the Fascist Revolution [La mostra della Rivoluzione fascista del 1932]
include Mario Sironi, Enrico Prampolini, Gerardo Dottori, Adalberto Libera,
and Giuseppe Terragni. Others whose work embodied the fusion of Modernist
technique and Fascist iconography are Umberto Boccioni, Gino Severino,
Tullio di Albisola, Thayaht [Ernesto Michahelles], and Renato Bertelli.

Vichy France
In France artistic organizations and cultural figures aligned with
political parties on the right (the Popular Front as well as various
Catholic, reactionary, monarchist, anti-Capitalist, romantic pastoralist,
and anti-Semitic splinter groups) saw themselves gain cultural ascendency
over their leftist avant-garde peers following the successful German
invasion in 1940 and the onset of the Vichy governments policy of
collaboration. Long-standing ties between like-minded artists in France and
Nazi Germany (forged in cultural exchanges like that of the 1937 Berlin
exhibition, Franzsische Kunst der Gegenwart) were thereby strengthened.
Among the most important of these connections was that between the
modernizing neo-classicist French sculptors Charles Despiau and Aristide
Maillol and the German sculptor (and Hitler favorite) Arno Breker, and the
French Modernist architect Le Corbusier and his German teacher, Peter
Behrens. Some of the most famous French painters of the early twentieth
century, such as Andr Derain and Maurice de Vlaminck, leaders of FAUVISM,
joined artists like Francis Picabia (associated with DADA and SURREALISM)
in supporting the Vichy regime and adjusting their style to create a French
variant of Nazi iconography. A number of prominent young Modernist writers
(former Dadaists, nihilists, and futurists as well as reactionary
nationalists) supported the Vichy policy of collaboration with the Nazi
occupation, including Robert Brasillach, Louis-Ferdiand Cline, Henri
Petit, Marguerite Duras, Lucien Rebatet, Pierre Drieu la Rochelle, Charles
Maurras (founder of the Action Franais), and the multi-talented Jean
Cocteau. Controversially, the influential American expatriate writer
Gertrude Stein signaled her sympathy with the Vichy regime by translating
dozens of speeches by Marchal Philippe Ptain for the purpose of
publishing them in the United States.

Key reference works:
Mark Antliff, Avant-Garde Fascism: The Mobilization of Myth, Art, and
Culture in France, 1909-1939 (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2007).
Ruth Ben-Ghiat, Fascist Modernities: Italy, 1922-1945 (Berkeley, Los
Angeles: University of California Press, 2001).
Roger Griffin, Modernism and Fascism: The Sense of a Beginning under
Mussolini and Hitler (Houndmills, New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2007).
Marla Susan Stone, The Patron State: Culture and Politics in Fascist Italy
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1998).
Barbara Will, Unlikely Collaboration: Gertrude Stein, Bernard Fa, and the
Vichy Dilemma (New York: Columbia University Press, 2011).

