
Korean Fauvism - Korean
Korean Fauvism emerged from within a larger avant-garde art movement of the
1930s and 40s. At that time, most Korean artists were producing works in
the style of Academic Realism, as represented and supported by the Joseon
Art Exhibition. However, during this period a few Korean artists, such as
Ku Bon-ung, Kim Chong-tai, and Lee Jung-seop, began producing works
reflecting the influence of Fauvism after they were exposed to the style
while studying modern Western oil painting in Japan. These artists bypassed
major government art exhibitions, such as the Official Japanese Salon
(Bunten) or the Joseon Art Exhibition in Korea, in favour of exhibitions
presenting works by independent artist groups, such as the White Savages
Group, the Mok-il Group, and the Association of Free Artists. Their
Expressionist-style works were marked by a strong subjectivity in the
depiction of forms, and a use of colour that eschewed balance to
explosively convey emotion. Despite these bold characteristics, Korean
Fauvism did not endure long enough to become a substantial art movement
with a distinct legacy.
Ku Bon-ung (1906-1953) produced avant-garde artworks as a member of the
White Savages Group (1930) and the Mok-il Group (1934). Ku was exposed to
Fauvism while studying art and aesthetics in Japan, first at Nihon
University (1929) and then at the Taiheiyo Art School (1934). His work
Woman (1930s), which uses thick brushstrokes and intense colours to present
a distorted depiction of a woman, is known as the archetypal work of the
Korean Fauvists. This work reflects the influence of Japanese Fauvist
artist Satomi Katsuzo, as well as Maurice de Vlaminck. While studying in
Japan, Ku participated in the Nika Exhibition (Nikaten), along with other
artists who renounced the government exhibitions.
Korean Fauvist Kim Chong-tai (1906-1935), worked exclusively in Korea. Kim
often used light colours and a very basic background to highlight the
people in his paintings, almost like an ink-and-wash painting. He learned
and experimented with various new aesthetic styles, including Fauvism,
Expressionism, and Cubism, as can be seen in his work Yellow Top (1929).
Lee Jung-seop (1916-1956) became known for his bold, rough, linear
expressions. He went to Japan in 1935, studying first at the Imperial Art
Academy (Teikoku Bijutsu Gakko) and then in the Art Department at Bunka
Gakuen University. While in Japan, in 1938, he became a member of the
Association of Free Artists, an avant-garde art group. One of Lees
trademark motifs was a simple rendering of an ox with thick outlines. The
bold colors, powerful brushstrokes, and wailing facial expressions capture
the solitude and despair of an individual, but also the suffering of the
Korean people.
Korean Fauvists did not simply copy European Fauvism. Rather than utilizing
Fauvist expressions to convey primitive sensation, they sought to expose
the intensity of the inner self. In particular, the works of Ku Bon-ung and
Lee Jung-seop used intense colours and unrestrained linear expressions to
deliver psychological aspects, in much the same way as Eastern calligraphy.

References and further reading
Kim, Hyun-sook. (1997) Acceptance of Modernism: Through the Case of Ku Bon-
ungs Works, in Journal of Art History, No. 11,: 129-152..
Kim, Young-na. (2005) Korean Avant-garde Group in Tokyo in   the 1930s,
in  the 20th Century Korean Art. London: Laurence King Publishing Ltd: 124-
151
Youn, Bum-mo. (2005) Artist, Rha Hyesuk. Seoul: Hyeonamsa.
