
Finnegans Wake

Experimental masterpiece by JAMES JOYCE, published in 1939. JOYCE began
writing it during 1923 and parts of it appeared under the title Work-in-
Progress within literary periodicals, such as TRANSITION, and in pamphlet
form. It has a reputation as the most difficult text of literary modernism.


JOYCE set out to write a history of the world and much of the structure
of the book derives from Italian philosopher and historian Giambatista
Vicos New Science (1725) which breaks down history into a series of cyclic
phases. The final title, however, alludes to a Dublin street ballad about a
builder who falls from a ladder: Tim Finnegan is aroused from
unconsciousness when a drop of whisky touches his mouth during the wake
organised by his family who think him dead. JOYCE used this to allude to
Viconian myths of fall and redemption or resurrection. Written during the
early years of Irish independence and the Wakes mythic re-cycling of
history and literature also bears upon contemporary developments. The
absence of apostrophe in the title is deliberate: although derived from
Finnegans Wake, it also urges the Irish (Finnegans) to rise from their
historical stupor.

Much of the Wake concerns the history of this central figure and his family
in various incarnations: Humphrey Chimpden Earwicker and his wife Anna
Livia Plurabelle are both recognisable within the text by their initials
HCE and ALP. Amongst other roles, HCE is Tim Finnegan, the King of Ireland,
a pope, an inn-keeper, he is even a giant buried in the grounds of Dublins
Phoenix Park, whereas ALP also personifies the river Liffey flowing through
the centre of Dublin. Other characters include their two sons Shem and
Shaun; their daughter Izzy; a group of four old men (who are also the four
books of the Gospel and the four provinces of Ireland); twenty-nine young
girls and twelve men who are the customers in HCEs pub and the twelve
apostles at the same time.

Making sense of JOYCEs intentions for Finnegans Wake is complicated by his
complex punning style in which allusions to different languages, works of
literature, places and historical events overlap in portmanteau words. In
the opening sentence of the book, for example, an allusion to Eve and
Adams combines reference to the biblical story of Original sin, a
Franciscan Church known as Adam and Eves on Merchants Quay in Dublin,
located on the site of a public house with the same name and (by reversing
the names) the relative flow of the nearby Liffey.

Some critics have suggested its style represents the receptivity of
consciousness to multiple meanings whilst dreaming, as if Finnegans Wake
were the contents of HCEs mind as he sleeps or lies unconscious. SAMUEL
BECKETT argued JOYCE was rescuing language and literature from clich:
Here words are not the polite contortions of 20th century printers ink,
he wrote. They are alive. They elbow their way on to the page, and glow
and blaze and fade and disappear (Beckett 1929: 15).

Although Work-in-Progress mystified most early readers, JOYCEs break with
conventional narrative forms appealed to theorists of textuality and
language, such as  Roland Barthes, Hlne Cixous, Jacques Derrida and
Jacques Lacan. Much recent critical work, however, has focussed upon the
Wakes genesis, tracing the evolution of JOYCEs style through various
drafts and attempting to unpick overlapping allusions by uncovering the
source materials in his notes. Finnegans Wake remains one of the most
challenging literary works ever written.

References and Further Reading

Samuel Beckett, et al, Our Exagmination Round His Factification for
  Incamination of Work in Progress (1929)
John Bishop, Joyces Book of the Dark (1986)
Jacques Derrida, Two Words for Joyce, in Post-Structuralist Joyce, ed.
  Derek Attridge and Daniel Ferrer (1984)
Finn Fordham, Lots of Fun at Finnegans Wake: Unravelling Universals (2008)
Roland McHugh, Annotations to Finnegans Wake, 2nd edn (2006)
Sam Slote and Lucca Crispi, ed. How Joyce Wrote Finnegans Wake (2007)

Multimedia resources

Audio recording of Joyce reading from the Wake:
http://ubumexico.centro.org.mx/sound/joyce_james/Joyce-James_Anna-Livia-
Plurabelle.mp3

Matthew Creasy, University of Glasgow
