
Charles BAUDELAIREs Fleurs du Mal (1851-66) is perhaps the most important
collection of poems in the nineteenth century and, coupled with Gustave
Flauberts Madame Bovary, constitutes a key and pivotal work of literary
modernity. In it are themes that greatly shaped modernism: the notions of
spleen and ennui, the grotesque, ambivalent subjectivity, the
phantasmagoria of commodification, the introduction of the city into
lyrical poetry, the Modern, and Modernity.

A major theme of the Fleurs du Mal is the opposition of Spleen et Idal
(Spleen and Ideal), in which are developed and renewed Romantic notions
of beauty and disenchantment. The two concepts, opposed, represent the
interdependent poles of modern subjectivity and poetic creation. On one
hand, there is the very romantic Ideal, the exotic dream of distant
shores, of the voyage to Cythera of aesthetic beauty. On the other hand
there is the Mal du sicle (an epochal malaise or world-weariness) and
melancholy disenchantment that characterized much of Romantic and early
modernist sensibility. These two poles depend upon each other in
Baudelaires works (the same opposition functions in his prose poems, the
Petits Pomes en Prose) in their reciprocal tension: the Romantic dream is
an escape from a disenchanted world, the disenchantment is the inevitable
crash that comes from the illusion of the dream.

Baudelaire developed a formal-thematic poetic expression of this condition,
thus continuing the Romantic tradition and at the same time implicitly
critiquing or diagnosing it, similarly to Flauberts Madame Bovary.
(Indeed, one of the clearest expressions of Baudelaires literary theory
appears in his short piece on Madame Bovary.) An example of the formal-
thematic expression of the opposition between beauty and disenchantment
would be the grotesque, a notion initially developed in the nineteenth
century by Victor Hugo. The grotesque is at once aesthetic, in that the
beautiful and the ugly are combined using conflicting literary techniques
such as clashing vocabulary, imagery and dissonant and discordant verse;
and thematic, in that ideas not normally together are combined to create
new associations and perspectives. The whole creates a new sensation of
simultaneous beauty and disgust, wonder and horror.

Beauty, as connected to the grotesque, adds another aspect to the anguished
opposition between Spleen et Idal. In his Hymne  la Beaut (Hymn to
Beauty), Baudelaire describes beauty thus: Viens-tu du ciel profond ou
sors-tu de labme, / O Beaut ? Ton regard, infernal et divin, / Verse
confusment le bienfait et le crime, / Et lon peut pour cela te comparer
au vin (Did you spring out of heaven or the abyss, / Beauty? Your gaze
infernal, yet divine, / Spreads infamy and glory, grief and bliss, / And
therefore you can be compared to wine Campbell translation, 1952). Thus
theological implications play a key role in Baudelaires poetics, and come
to define the parameters of ennui (both boredom and melancholy), as
Italian philosopher Giorgio Agamben demonstrates. L'ennui is in fact a
key theme of the collection, right from the dedication to the reader, Au
lecteur, which is also an address to the Bourgeois, the hypocrite
lecteur (hypocritical reader) who would condemn the work out of false
morality.

Baudelaire states that dans ce livre atroce, j'ai mis tout mon cur, toute
ma tendresse, toute ma religion (travestie), toute ma haine (in this
horrible book I have put all my heart, all my tenderness, all my religion
(falsified), all my hatred"). It is, however, a structured collection, and
Baudelaire attempted to give it meaning and order: le seul loge que je
sollicite pour ce livre est qu'on reconnaisse qu'il n'est pas un pur album
et qu'il a un commencement et une fin (the only praise that I seek for
this book is that one recognize that it is not a pure album and that it has
a beginning and an end, letter to Vigny, 1861). In this, Baudelaire
distinguishes the Fleurs from Romantic albums and sentimental chronologies,
such as Victor Hugos Contemplations. He thus proposes a structured whole
and a journey through its reading, refusing to publish the poems
separately. However, whether each of the poems is in relation with the
others, and exactly how, is up for debate (Walter Benjamin argues in favour
of a personal suffering that guides the collections structure, to the
exclusion of all other lyrical themes). It is nevertheless clear that it is
a cycle of poems in dialogue, in the same way that the Ideal cannot be
thought of separately from Spleen, and each poem elucidates the others. It
is a totality of moveable parts, as Leo Bersani states, where the meaning
is always dynamic. The poem also is likened to a flnerie as the
experience of modernity, the flneur also being one of those key figures of
modernism introduced by Baudelaire. There is also the possibility that the
poem is epic, insofar as Baudelaire asks, in the Salon of 1846, what the
epic side of modern life might be. Yet it would only ever be fragmentary,
contingent, fleeting  key characteristics of Baudelaires modernity.

There is also a certain progressive structure in the Fleurs. Au lecteur
opens the collection with a warning to the reader against ennui; Spleen et
Idal is a description of the schism of modern identity; Tableaux
parisiens, the ugliness and majesty of the modern city; Le vin and
Fleurs du mal a panorama of the temptations of the flesh, dreams, and
artificial paradises, femme fatales; Rvolte, insults, blasphemy,
prayers and litanies; and finally La Mort (Death), the final temptation
of death as salvation and a fragile, problematic alienation in the
unknown and the new, without any possible resolution.

The collection is also noted for its misogynistic representations, whether
Baudelaire is projecting his own psychoses onto women who mirror male
desire (according to Susan Wolf), or whether these women (who include not
just lovers, but widows and beggars, representing poverty and the
difficulties of childbirth) are distinctly individual, never fading into
stereotypes, expressing the transience of human relationships (according to
Rosemary Lloyd).

Because of legal problems and censorship following the initial publication
of the collection, there are multiple editions of the Fleurs du Mal. The
first edition appeared in 1857, and a second in 1861, minus six censored
poems and including 35 new poems and the Tableaux parisiens.  The 1866
edition included new poems, Epaves (Scraps), as well as the censored
poems. This edition appeared in Brussels, as the censored poems were banned
in France. A posthumous edition appeared in 1868 that excluded the censored
poems, and a Complment aux Fleurs du Mal de Charles Baudelaire was
published with the paves in 1869. The censored poems were only published
in France in 1949 after a review of the legal condemnations of offenses
against good morals committed by the means of books.

Bibliography

Agamben, Giorgio. Stanzas. Word and Phantasm in Western Culture, part II.
        Minnesota: University of Minnesota Press, 1993 => Stanze. La parola
        e il fantasma nella cultura occidentale. Turin: Einaudi, 1977.
Benjamin, Walter. The Writer of Modern Life. Essays on Charles Baudelaire.
        Boston: Belknap-Harvard UP, 2006.
Bersani, Leo. Baudelaire and Freud. Berkeley: University of California
        Press, 1978.
Burton, Richard D. E. Baudelaire and the Second Republic. Writing and
        Revolution. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1991.
Lloyd, Rosemary. Baudelaires World. Ithaca: Cornell University Press,
        2002.
Wolf, Susan L. Baudelaires Sepulchres in Approaches to Teaching
        Baudelaire's Flowers of Evil, Laurence M. Porter (ed.), New York:
        MLA, 2000.
