
                          E.M. Forster (1879-1970)
One of the leading British novelists of the early decades of the twentieth
century, Edward Morgan Forster is best known for his novels Howards End
(1910) and A Passage to India (1924). Forster attended Cambridge University
from 1897 to 1901 where he became a member of the Cambridge Apostles secret
society, which included philosophers Bertrand Russell, G.E. Moore, and
Ludwig Wittgenstein. Membership in this society brought him into contact
with several members of the Bloomsbury Group, including economist James
Maynard Keynes, Virginia Woolfs husband Leonard Woolf, and biographer
Lytton Strachey. His work is best remembered for its use of realism to
denounce the repressiveness of Edwardian British culture and it is often
infused with liberal humanism. Additionally, his use of third person
omniscient narrative and abundant dialogue gave Forster a unique narrative
style that influenced a number of later authors. Throughout his career
Forster associated with a host of writers and artists including Siegfried
Sassoon, Rupert Brooke, and Christopher Isherwood. Forster was highly
influenced by his travels throughout the European continent and India. His
works often illustrate this interest by focusing on settings outside of
England. All of the novels published in Forsters lifetime were published
before 1925, after which Forster spent his life working on non-fiction
including biographies, travel narratives, and essays.

Key Works During Lifetime:
                                  Where Angels Fear to Tread (1905)
                                  The Longest Journey (1907)
                                  A Room with a View (1908)
                                  Howards End (1910)
                                  A Passage to India (1924)

Forster was born 1 January 1879 into a respectable London family. His
father died of consumption in 1880, leaving Forsters childhood dominated
by female figures. After an inheritance allowed Forster a successful
childhood education, he graduated from Cambridge University with bachelors
degrees in classics in 1900 and history in 1901. Following his graduation,
Forster travelled with his mother to Greece and Italy from 1901-07 before
returning home to England to lecture at Working Mens College, London. His
travels influenced Forsters writing, as did his service as a Red Cross
Volunteer in Alexandria, Egypt and his trips to India in 1912 and 1921.
During the First World War, Forster was a vocal conscientious objector and
worked as a volunteer for the International Red Cross in Egypt. Forster
permanently returned to England in 1921 and remained there until his death
in 1970.

Forsters first novel, Where Angels Fear to Tread (1905), takes Lilia
Herriton as its main character and shows the influence of Forsters early
travels. The novel draws its title from Alexander Popes An Essay on
Criticism. This novel also sets the stage for Forsters literary
representations of the European continent and the influence of his travels
on his writing. Lilia and her daughter Irma travel to Italy where she falls
in love with an Italian peasant named Carella. After being disowned by the
Herriton family and realizing her marriage with Carella isnt what she
thought it was, Lilia dies giving birth to Carellas son. The Herriton
family desires to bring the new child back to England and sends Philip
Herriton, Lilias brother-in-law, to retrieve the child. In their efforts
to ensure the child be raised as an Englishman, Forster represents the
Herritons as caring less for the childs well-being and more for
maintaining appearances. The baby ends up dying in an accident before the
Herritons reconcile with Carella and return to England. Like many of
Forsters later novels, Where Angels Fear to Tread concerns itself with the
ability of forging connections across cultures. The novels characters
experience both physical and spiritual journeys and emerge at the end of
the novel with new knowledge of both their own and foreign cultures.

Forsters next novel, The Longest Journey (1907), was his first major work.
This novel, a sort of Bildungsroman, takes place in England and is set
primarily in Cambridge and Wiltshire. The early part of the novel reflects
Forsters time at Cambridge as the novels protagonist Rickie Elliot is a
student there near the beginning of the century. The novel begins with an
examination of Rickies progress as a writer and the development of his
relationship with Agnes and Herbert Pembroke. After Rickie and Agnes are
married and take posts working with Herbert at Sawston School, Rickies
career as a writer and relationship with his half-brother Stephen Wonham
begins to deteriorate. The novel ends with Rickie dying while saving a
drunken Stephen from being struck by a train. After Rickies death, his
book of stories is published and he posthumously becomes a noted author.
Drawing from Forsters time at Cambridge and his philosophical influences,
the text concerns itself with a number of philosophical questions while
also demonstrating heavy symbolism to highlight the tragic aspects of human
existence.

His third novel, A Room with a View (1908), also emphasizes Forsters early
travels to the continent. This novel focuses on the interactions between
the bourgeois family of Lucy Honeychurch and the more progressive family of
George Emerson during the height of Edwardian England. The novel begins
with Lucy and her cousin Charlotte visiting Florence, Italy and their
complaints about their rooms having a view of the courtyard rather than the
River Arno. Mr. Emerson and his son George offer to switch rooms with Lucy
and Charlotte and this begins the interactions between Lucy and George. The
second part of the novel opens in Rome while Lucy and Cecil Vyse begin to
spend time together before Lucy returns to her family home in Surrey,
England. This novel anticipates the later class analysis in Howards End,
and illustrates the class conflicts that were common in the early years of
the twentieth-century. In the end of the novel, Lucy turns away from
wealthier Cecil Vyse and marries the working-class George Emerson and
returns to Florence. The novel stands out as one of the most striking
portrayals of Edwardian culture: Lucy represents the young, empowered
generation beginning to take shape just after the turn-of-the-century in
England, and Forster emphasizes Italian culture as much less repressive.

Forsters next two novels are undoubtedly the most celebrated works in his
oeuvre. Howards End (1910) gives a more complete view of the social and
economic relationships in turn-of-the-century England. The novel, which
derives its title from the name of the Wilcoxs family home, focuses on the
interconnected relationships between the wealthy Wilcox family, the
culturally-ambitious half-German Schlegel sisters (Margaret and Helen), and
the lower-middle-class Basts. After the death of Ruth Wilcox, who attempts
to leave Howards End to her friend Margaret Schlegel, her husband Henry
becomes romantically involved with Margaret. The Wilcox children resent
Margaret for posing a threat to their inheritance of the family home,
believing that she only values it as real estate. After Henry Wilcox costs
Leonard Bast his modest position as a clerk, we learn that years earlier
Henry and Basts wife Jacky had engaged in an affair that ended with Henry
severely mistreating Jacky. Margaret and Helen begin to drift apart as
Margaret is to be wed to Henry, and Helen begins to gravitate towards
Leonard, eventually becoming pregnant with his child. When Leonard
confronts Henry and Margaret near the end of the novel, Henrys son Charles
attacks Leonard, who is killed when a bookcase falls on top of him.
Margaret leaves Henry, and his emotional transformation results in his
reconsidering his previous positions. He wills the home to Margaret (as
Ruth had originally intended) and stipulates that the home ultimately be
left to Helens son by Leonard. At the end of the novel the Schlegel
sisters bring the Wilcoxes and the Basts together.

The last novel published during Forsters life, A Passage to India (1924),
is often considered to be his masterpiece. After traveling to India,
Forster wrote the novel against the background of the Indian Independence
movement; it is loosely based on his experiences. The novel centers on the
young Englishwoman Adela Questeds journey to India to meet Ronny Heaslop,
a colonial officer she may marry. In an effort to experience the authentic
India, Adela and Ronnys mother Mrs. Moore visit the Marabar caves with Dr.
Aziz, a local physician. Adela accuses Dr. Aziz of sexual assault and a
trial ensues. During the trial Adela recants her accusation and Aziz is
freed. Critics have celebrated the novel as a detailed examination of the
British colonial system and an unveiling of the civilizing mission
associated with the British Empire.

After the publication of A Passage to India, Forster began to focus his
creative attentions on non-fiction including biographies and historical
accounts. His last novel, Maurice (1971), would not be published until
after Forsters death. This novel, suppressed because of its homosexual
content, follows the coming-of-age story of Maurice Hall and his conflicted
feelings of homosexuality.

Despite the fact that Forster did not publish a novel in the last four
decades of his life, his reputation as a novelist persists. Howards End
remains celebrated for its depiction of the social and economic systems of
early-twentieth century England, and A Passage to India stands as one of
the most canonical English texts for the early-twentieth century. It
remains an important indictment of the British colonial system. Forster
remains one of the most important and influential writers in twentieth
century British literature. Several of Forsters novels have been made into
motion pictures, and his influence has been felt by contemporary writers
like Zadie Smith, whose On Beauty (2005) was loosely based on Forsters
Howards End.

-Adam R. McKee


* FORSTER IMAGE URL
 http://www.bbc.co.uk/iplayer/images/episode/b00n5vjs_640_360.jpg



