Taylor & Francis – Encyclopedia of Modernism

		



About you

[Salutation]

Joel

[Middle name]

Hawkes







University of Victoria



Your article

Foulds, John (1880-1939)

[Enter any variant forms of your headword – OPTIONAL]

[Enter an abstract for your article]

John Herbert Foulds (1880-1939) was an English composer of classical music who found popularity with his light music and theatrical scores, but also created more experimental compositions that drew inspiration from Indian music, and explored the relationship between music, literature and painting.  Furthermore, he was one of the first British composers to use quarter-tones (a pitch half way between the regular notes on the chromatic scale) in his compositions.    



Foulds began learning the piano when just four years old, and by the age of seven he played the oboe as well, and had begun to compose.  His first performed piece was Rhapsodie nach Heine in Halifax in 1897.  In 1900, he joined his father in the Hallé Orchestra where he met and was appreciated by conductor Hans Richter, and it was likely Richter who invited him, in 1906, to Tonkunstlerfest des Allgemeines Deutschen Musikvereins in Essen, where he met composers such as Mahler and Strauss.  Foulds’s music was from very early on able to emulate and transform distinct styles of other composers, a skill exhibited in the Schuman and Wagner-influenced Dichterliebe (1897-98).  Other significant works from this period include the earliest surviving example of his quarter-tones compositions, the cello sonata “The Waters of Babylon” (1905) and Lyrics for solo piano (in Opus 1), which uses an experimental, unbarred notation and structure, with music arranged and punctuated like a poem (1905); Foulds’s Epithalamium (1905-06) became his first orchestral piece produced in this “Music-Poem” format.  One of his largest compositions also dates from this time, the concert opera, The Vision of Dante (c. 1905-08).  In 1905, Variazioni ed Improvvisati became his first work in print.



Lighter music, such as Foulds’s Holiday Sketches (1909) and Keltic Suite (1911), and the later Lyra Celtica and Gaelic Melodies (mid-1920s), brought a steady income, as did over thirty theatre scores, many of which were penned for Lewis Carson and Sybil Thorndike productions, including Bernard Shaw’s Saint Joan, written especially for Thordike to star.  From around 1912 to the outbreak of the Great War, Foulds also composed a number of what he called “Music-Pictures,” responses to visual stimuli, in particular to paintings.  The first movement in Music-Pictures Group III (1912), for example, is entitled “The Ancient of Days,” responding to the watercolour by William Blake.  After the war, his World Requiem was premiered at the Royal Albert Hall in commemoration of the war dead.  The piece called for world peace, and drew from writers such as John Bunyan and Hindu religious poet Kabir.  However, after the international success of Requiem, Foulds’s reputation declined, especially during his time in Europe (1927-30) – in Sicily and then France, a period where he met Korngold, Varèse, and Stravinsky.  At this time, he not only became interested in Greek Modes as a focus for composition but also other Modes, including those used in classical Indian music, producing six so-called “Essays” (of a much larger planned work), in Essays in the Modes (1920-27).  Another important work from this time is Three Choruses in the Hippolytus of Euripides (1928).  



Upon returning to England, Foulds attempted to re-establish himself as a “serious” composer and looked to the BBC to perform his work, though ultimately they were more disposed to his lighter music.  The BBC did, however, perform his more “serious” piece Dynamic Triptych (1931) to much acclaim.  Other works of interest during this period include Quartetto Intimo (1932) and The Seven Ages (1932), a setting of “All the world’s a stage” speech from As You Like It.  In 1934, Foulds published Music To-day: Its Heritage from the Past, and Legacy to the Future, a contemplation of his musical influences, including those of mysticism; thoughts on Modern composers, and his own compositional methods with many references to his Quartetto Intimo in illustration of modern techniques.  Plans for a second volume on the subject of Indian music, and his continued fascination with this music, led him to India in 1935.



Foulds’s early interest in mysticism and the occult found form in Theosophy but later developed into a broader appreciation of mysticism, which had always been informed by particular interest in India.  The surviving arrangements, Three Mantras, from his unfinished opera, Avatara (1919-32), showcase this influence.  In India, he taught music and in 1937 became director of the European Music Department of All-India Radio in Delhi, though his time was primarily directed to a study of Indian music and the collection of its folksongs.  He continued to compose in both European and Indian styles, later blurring the two as he would also blur distinctions between light and serious music.  Compositions of this period include Indian Suite (1932-35), Chinese Suite (1935), and An Arabian Night (1936).  His final, though unfinished, major work, Pasquinades Symphoniques, is constructed as a commentary on symphonic form, with the final “Modernist” movement reflecting Cubist artistic forms.       



After his death in India in 1939 from cholera, Foulds’s music and reputation fell into further decline; only in the mid 1970s did his work begin to be rediscovered.  

Further reading:

[Enter citations for further reading here]