
Frazer, Sir James George (1854-1941)

Scottish social anthropologist and classical scholar, J.G. Frazer is best
known for his study of myth and ritual, The Golden Bough, first published
in two volumes in 1890. Frazers work and his methods of cultural
comparison not only influenced anthropology, but also shaped a strand of
mythopoeic thinking in the work of writers and poets such as T.S. ELIOT and
W.B. YEATS.

Born in Glasgow, Frazer completed his education at Trinity College,
Cambridge where he became a Fellow in 1879. Although a Classicist by
training, his work on entries about totemism and taboo for the
Encyclopaedia Britannica during 1888 led to the project published as The
Golden Bough. In this work, Frazer sets out to investigate the bases of the
ritual slaughter of a priest king in the sacred grove of Nemi, starting
from allusions to this story in the Aeneid and a painting by J. M. W.
Turner. He then proceeds to uncover comparable stories in other classical
sources, discovering in the process a set of common concepts relating to
an annual ritual sacrifice to the gods of fertility and vegetation in an
attempt to ensure the seasonal renewal of the land.

In addition to Greek and Latin, Frazer also benefited from the reach of the
British Empire, drawing upon the accounts of other cultures brought back by
missionaries, explorers and colonists. Indeed, over the course of his
lifetime, these materials increased so much that a second edition expanded
to three volumes in 1900 and the third had reached twelve volumes by 1914.
Although he chose not to emphasise his inclusion of biblical sources,
Frazers work became notorious for its refusal to discriminate between the
received status of its sources. Classical, non-classical sources, parts of
the Bible were all absorbed into his study of vegetation gods and
sympathetic magic.

Irish poet W.B. YEATS credited Frazer with influencing his own attempts to
collect and interpret Irish myths and folk stories in works such as The
Celtic Twilight (1896). But Frazers work also appealed to modernists on
aesthetic grounds: first, his accounts of ritual and a prevailing belief in
various forms of sympathetic magic pointed to a savagery or primitivism
underlying the complexities of civilisation. The Golden Bough thus chimes
with modernisms fascination with the primitive, from D.H. LAWRENCE to
PICASSO. Secondly, Frazers use of cross-comparison appealed to modernist
allusive practices. T.S. ELIOT explicitly referred to Frazer in his notes
to The Waste Land as a key to understanding his juxtaposition of modern-day
London, scenes from Shakespeare, Ovids Metamorphoses and metaphysical
poetry. ELIOT also cites Frazer when crediting JAMES JOYCE with the
invention of a mythic method in ULYSSES, which manipulates a continuous
parallel between contemporaneity and antiquity in his essay Ulysses,
Order and Myth (1922).


List of Works

The Golden Bough 2 volumes (1890); 2nd edition 3 volumes (1900); 3rd
edition 12 volumes (1911-1914)

Further Reading

Robert Ackerman, J.G. Frazer: His Life and Work (1987)
Robert Frazer, ed., Sir James Frazer and the Literary Imagination (1990)
J.B. Vickery, The Literary Impact of The Golden Bough (1973)

Matthew Creasy, University of Glasgow
