Gandini, Gerardo (born Buenos Aires, Argentina, October 16, 1936 – died Buenos Aires, March 22, 2013)
Pablo Fessel
Argentine composer, pianist and conductor. Former student and assistant of Alberto Ginastera, his production of more than 120 works lead him to occupy a significant place within Argentine contemporary culture. Gandini's work forms an intertextual framework that relates his own music with other works of music, as well as with other arts.
Overview
Gerardo Gandini studied piano with Pía Sebastiani, Roberto Caamaño and Ivonne Loriod, and composition with Alberto Ginastera. Gandini became from 1962 onwards Ginastera's assistant professor of composition and analysis at the avant-garde Latin American Centre for Advanced Musical Studies of the Di Tella Institute in Buenos Aires. In 1966 he studied with Geofredo Petrassi at the Accademia di Santa Cecilia in Rome. In 1970 he taught composition at the Julliard School of Music in New York. After that he acted as composition professor at the National University of La Plata, the Argentine Catholic University, and the Latin American Courses of Contemporary Music. He gave courses of composition at various institutions in Buenos Aires such as the Goethe Institute, San Telmo and Antorchas Foundations, and Melos Publishing House.
Gandini's compositions and career were distinguished by numerous prizes such as the Buenos Aires Prize for Composition (1960), the Molière Prize given by the French Government for theater music (1977), the Guggenheim Fellowship (1982), the Argentine National Music Prize (1996), the Career Trajectory Prize of the Argentine National Fund for the Arts (1996), the Osella d’Oro at the Venice Film Festival (1998), and the Tomás Luis de Victoria Ibero-American Composition Prize (2008).
As a pianist, Gandini has participated in many international festivals, and has been piano soloist at the Argentine National Symphony Orchestra. His performances not only consist of contemporary concert music but also of jazz and tango. In 1989 he took part in the last sextet founded and led by Astor Piazzolla. From then on he has interpreted and recorded a number of tango arrangements, called "Postangos", which made him to obtain the Latin Grammy prize in 2004. As a conductor, he grounded and conducted the Sinfonietta of the Omega Insurance Foundation. He acted also as a conductor of the Buenos Aires Philharmonic Orchestra, and as musical director of the Colón Theatre.
Gandini's concerns as interpreter and conductor are very often associated with his activity as a disseminator of contemporary music in Argentina. He premiered numerous works by other composers. He was also grounder and director of the Center of Experimentation in Opera and Ballet of the Colón Theatre of Buenos Aires, and curator of concert cycles of contemporary music at both public and private institutions in Argentine, among them the National Library.
Works
Gandini developed since 1969 a musical poetics based on different modes of musical borrowing, by means of citation or allusion, which do not limit to music but extend to other arts as well. These references are related to a meta-musical condition of his works: Gandini sees composition as result of a conversation among different works of music in an “Imaginary Sound Museum”. This position results from what the composer himself characterized as an exhaustion of the stage of material experimentation and discovery, and their displacement to the level of musical syntax. This diagnosis has been interpreted by the specialized critic as reception of the crisis of material thinking in the European postwar contemporary music, which Gandini shared with other argentinean composers such as Alberto Tauriello and Marta Lambertini.
Among Gandini’s ample production as a composer, an important group of his works comprises elements taken from Robert Schumann’s music. The group includes Eusebius, in its versions for piano (1984) and for orchestra (1984-85); RSCH: Escenas, for piano and orchestra (1984); RSCH: Testimonios, for voice, piano and tape (1984); RSCH: Elegía, for piano (1986); some pieces of the Diaries I-III, 36 Preludes for piano (1960-87); the Studies, for violin and piano (1990); the opera Liederkreis: una ópera sobre Schumann (2000); and lastly, Eusebius II for piano (2006). The Fantasie-Impromptu for piano and orchestra, premiered in Washington in 1971 and recorded by the Louisville Orchestra (USA), depicts an imaginary portrait of Chopin by means of a re-reading of the B-flat minor Mazurka. Imaginary Landscape (1988), for piano and orchestra, commissioned by the BBC for the Welsh Symphony Orchestra, has a descriptive aim; its first movement, "Description of the waters", reworks musical topics by Franz Liszt and Arnold Schoenberg. Works composed in 1991, such as Mozartvariationen, for chamber orchestra, and Rondando en la menor, for two pianos, recreate gestures and materials taken from Mozart's music. 
In 1996 Gandini began to compose Sonatas, of which eight are for piano solo, and one for violoncello. He composed three operas: La casa sin sosiego [The house without calmness] (1991), with libretto by Griselda Gambaro; La ciudad ausente [The absent city], based on the novel by Ricardo Piglia (1995), and Liederkreis, una ópera sobre Schumann [Liederkreis, an opera about Schumann] (2000), with libretto by Alejandro Tantanián. All of them were premiered at the Colón Theatre in Buenos Aires.
Bibliography
Corrado, O. (2002) “De Museos, Máquinas y Esperas. La ciudad ausente de Gerardo Gandini”, Boletín Música 9.
Etkin, M.; G. Cancián, C. Mastropietro & C. Villanueva (2001) “Cita y ornamentación en la música de Gerardo Gandini”, Música e investigación 9: 35-56.
Fessel, P. (2008) "The ‘imaginary sound museum’. The reinterpretation of European tradition in the music of Gerardo Gandini", Proceedings of the International Conference Beyond the Centres: Musical Avant-gardes since 1950. Thessaloniki. [http://btc.web.auth.gr]
Gianera, P. (2008) “La redención por la máquina”, La Biblioteca 7: 162-70.
Lambertini, M. (2008) Gerardo Gandini. Música - Ficción, Madrid, Fundación Autor.
Monjeau, F. (2001) “Metamorfosis de una relación: Gandini y Schumann”, Punto de vista 69: 24-26. 
Paraskevaídis, G. (1993) “The Own and the Other. The Argentinean Composer Gerardo Gandini", World New Music Magazine 3: 59-64.
Hearing
http://www.melos.com.ar/template.asp?op=gandini

Pablo Fessel
