Taylor & Francis – Encyclopedia of Modernism



About you

[Salutation]

Giuliano

[Middle name]

D’Amico



[Enter your biography]



Universitetet i Oslo [University of Oslo]



Your article

Garborg, Arne Aadne Eivindsson (1851-1924)

[Enter any variant forms of your headword – OPTIONAL]

Arne Garborg was one of the most prominent Norwegian writers of the latter half of the 19th century, and the first decades of the 20th century. He was among the first to write in Norway’s second official language, landsmål (later nynorsk), and his works range from novels to short stories, poems, drama, newspaper articles, and essays. Many of his early works are embedded in the Scandinavian Modern Breakthrough and Naturalism. In the 1890s he turned to a more psychologically oriented form of writing, inspired by literary decadence and by an emergent Modernism. Garborg was one of Norway’s major interpreters of the conflict between old and new ways of thinking about literature, religion, and society. He was married to the Norwegian writer Hulda Garborg.

Arne Garborg was one of the most prominent Norwegian writers of the latter half of the 19th century, and the first decades of the 20th century. He was among the first to write in Norway’s second official language, landsmål (later nynorsk), and his works range from novels to short stories, poems, drama, newspaper articles, and essays. Many of his early works are embedded in the Scandinavian Modern Breakthrough and Naturalism. In the 1890s he turned to a more psychologically oriented form of writing, inspired by literary decadence and by an emergent Modernism. Garborg was one of Norway’s major interpreters of the conflict between old and new ways of thinking about literature, religion, and society. He was married to the Norwegian writer Hulda Garborg.



Image: Garborg.jpg

Figure 1 Portrait of Arne Garborg

http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Garborg_portrett.jpg



Arne Garborg was born in 1851 in the rural district of Jæren in Western Norway where he grew up working on his pietistic family’s farm. His rural and strictly religious upbringing left a mark on his personality, and came to play an important role in his later works. His literary debut, Ein Fritenkjar (1881) is one of the first novels written in landsmål, and focuses on the struggle between religious dogmas and an increasingly secularised world. Bondestudentar [The Making of Daniel Braut] (1883) is a classic of Norwegian Naturalism, and tells the story of Daniel, who leaves his village in search of an education at the University of Kristiania (today’s Oslo). The novel depicts Daniel’s problematic search for identity: his education and social ambitions ultimately function to betray his own class. Garborg returned to such crises of the individual in the decadent novel Trætte Mænd [Weary Men] (1891), where he portrays three men trying to cope with the crisis of values at the fin de siècle. The conflict between religion and society is at stake in one of Garborg’s most important novels, Fred [Peace] (1892), where the protagonist, Enok, is increasingly devoured by a Pietist faith that results in his suicide. In the 1890s, Garborg’s production took a psychological and lyrical direction, particularly with his poetic cycle Haugtussa (1895), and the novels Den burtkomne Faderen [The Lost Father] (1899) and Heimkomin Son (1908). Throughout his life, Garborg worked for the development of landsmål as a literary language and, in later years, he translated several classics of world literature into landsmål, including the Odyssey and Ramayana. Although increasingly plagued by depression, he continued to write until his death (non-fiction, in particular). Garborg travelled extensively in Europe throughout his life, but died in his native district in 1924.



List of Works:

Novels

Ein Fritenkjar (1881)

Bondestudentar (1883)

Mannfolk (1886)

Hjaa ho Mor (1890)

Trætte Mænd (1891)

Fred (1892)

Den burtkomne Faderen (1899)

Heimkomin Son (1908)



Poetry collections

Haugtussa (1895)



English translations

The Lost Father (1920)

Peace (1929)

Weary Men (1999)

The making of Daniel Braut (2008)

Further reading:

(Arne Garborg (1851-1924))



(Mork)



(tenkjar.)



(The Arne and Hulda Garborg Centre)



(Thesen)



(Obrestad)



(Sjåvik)



(Søkeveiledning for Hanske)