
Garca Pardo, Luis (1910-2006)

The Uruguayan architect  Luis  Garca  Pardo  studied  architecture  in  the
School of  Architecture  of  the  Universidad  de  la  Repblica,  where  he
graduated in 1941. He belonged to a generation of Uruguayan architects  that
studied in a  school  permeated  by  the  modern  movement,  mainly  through
travels  to  Europe,  in  the  context  of   the   Grand   Prix   European
publications, and professors such as Julio  Vilamaj  (1894-1948).  Together
with colleagues Ral Sichero and Ildefonso Aroztegui he  adopted  a  revised
version of the International Style, in works where the geometric and  formal
purity is associated with cutting-edge technical  and  structural  execution
and, in the case of Garca Pardo in particular, the integration of the  fine
arts and other design areas to the architectural  project  notably  in  the
landscape design with Roberto Burle Marx.
      His defense  of  an  universal  modernity  was  no  impediment  for  a
heterogeneous  body  of  work  that  included  experimentations  with  newly
developed construction systems for social housing and, in his  last  period,
a series of  urban  proposals  characterized  by  a  remarkable  formal  and
organizational freedom.
      Garca Pardos projects in association with Adolfo  Sommer  Smith  for
the Gilpe, El Pilar, and Positano buildings stand among  the  most  relevant
codifications of the international modernity  in  Uruguay,  and  incorporate
what Garca Pardo named the perfect  functional  triangle,  distinguishing
among social, private and service  areas.  The  Gilpe  building,  Montevideo
(1953),  incorporates  a  glass  faade  for  the  first  time  in  Uruguay,
preceding the  use  of  the  courtain  wall,  and  announcing  a  series  of
technical and structural  innovations  that  will  become  more  evident  in
buildings such as El Pilar, Montevideo (1957), where  a  mono-block  hanging
structure is used in a residential building for  the  first  time,  in  this
opportunity to solve an extremely compromised lot.
      Following this same line he develops the project for the El  Positano,
Montevideo (1957), a rigorous block inserted in an irregular lot, where  the
glass faade operates in conjunction with a singular structural solution  of
cantilevered slabs supported by a central volume and two double  T  columns,
thus liberating the ground floor plan, which includes  gardens  designed  by
Brazilian landscape architect Roberto Burle Marx and a sculpture.  Both  the
Gilpe and El Positano buildings incorporate the  Fine  Arts,  in  a  Vicente
Mart mural painting and a sculpture by Germn Cabrera respectively,  making
explicit the enormous influence that the Taller Torres Garca, at  the  time
directed by Joaqun Torres Garcas  disciples,  exerted  in  the  Uruguayan
architectural scene.
      These  three  projects  are  complemented  with  several   residential
projects  both  private  and  apartment   units   chapels,   and   several
competition projects, including the Island  of  Utopia  for  the  island  of
Anchieta, in Ubatuba, Sao  Paulo  (1975).  Complementing  this  professional
heterodoxy, it is worth mentioning  the  VECA  system  (acronym  for  Social
Housing in Reinforced  Masonry)  for  prefab  housing  (1964),  an  integral
masonry construction system that reflects  the  technological  and  material
local possibilities and the use of non-specialized workforce.
      Garca Pardos modern discourse,  while  placed  within  the  critical
tradition of the sixties in Latin America and the Ro de la  Plata,  offered
an alternative to the dominant yet counterproductive dichotomy of the  local
and the international that guided many of the  writings  and  works  of  the
period: by alternating a series of iterations  on  the  International  Style
with the recourse to vernacular forms  and  technologies  he  bridged  these
antithetical views.

List of works
1952-56          Gilpe Building, Montevideo, Uruguay
1957-63          El Positano Building, Montevideo, Uruguay (with  A.  Sommer
Smith)
1955-56          Guanabara Building, Montevideo,  Uruguay  (with  A.  Sommer
Smith)
1957        El Pilar Building, Montevideo, Uruguay (with A. Sommer Smith)
1959-60          LHirondelle building, Punta del  Este,  Uruguay  (with  A.
Nebel Farini)
1961-62          Peugeot Building, Buenos Aires, Argentina (project)
1975  Anchieta Island  Tourist  Development,  Sao  Paulo,  Brazil  (with  L.
           Patrone Pereira and C. Garca Ferrs, project)

References and further reading
Medero,  S.  (ed.)  (2012)  Luis  Garca  Pardo,  Montevideo:  Instituto  de
Historia de la Arquitectura, Facultad de Arquitectura, UdelaR.
Gaeta, J. (ed.) (2000) Luis Garca Pardo, arquitecto, Montevideo:  Editorial
Dos Puntos.

























Visual material

[pic]
Edificio Gilpe Building, Montevideo, 1952-56
Source:http://www.arteinformado.com/documentos/eventos/06/63491/SMA,_Fachada
_del_Edificio_Gilpe,_Av._Brasil_2568-2574,_Ano_1952.jpg


Edificio Positano Building, Montevideo, 1957-63
Source: http://i414.photobucket.com/albums/pp229/eldayman/positano.jpg

[pic]
Edificio El Pilar Building, Montevideo, 1957
Source:
http://www.vitruvius.com.br/media/images/magazines/grid_9/026761dc38ce_ferna
nda_pardo03.jpg


