
Gillespie, Dizzy (1917-1993)

Dustin Garlitz
Dizzy Gillespie was an American jazz trumpeter, composer, and bandleader.
Gillespies artistic career was spent in New York City as a home base,
where he was active first performing in big bands, and then leading bands
of this own once modern jazz such as had bebop emerged.  The trumpeter was
one of the progenitors of the modern jazz movement of bebop in the 1940s,
along with his musical colleague CHARLIE PARKER.  Gillespie often performed
this music in HARLEM at the jazz nightclub Mintons Playhouse in the
period, including at after hour jam sessions with pianist THELONIOUS MONK
and alto saxophonist PARKER.  He is considered one of the pioneers of Latin
jazz, especially Afro-Cuban jazz, and traveled extensively performing this
music with an international roster of musicians.  Compositions that reflect
this style of jazz include Tin Tin Deo, and Manteca (1947).  His
musical orientation to Afro rhythms was evident as early as 1942, when he
composed the jazz standard A Night in Tunisia.  Gillespie gave modern
jazz tenor saxophonist JOHN COLTRANE his first start in improvisational
focused small band work once the trumpeter dissembled his big band in 1949
and formed a sextet.

      Dizzy Gillespie was born John Birks Gillespie on October 21, 1917 in
Cheraw, South Carolina.  Gillespie started playing the piano at age four,
and throughout his artistic career turned to that instrument to make sense
and conceptualize advanced chord progressions and harmonies that would come
to characterize modern jazz movements such as the bebop he co-founded.
Gillespie performed with alto saxophonist CHARLIE PARKER in the Billy
Eckstine band starting in 1944, which was considered the first modern big
band of bebop jazz.  Gillespie and PARKER would experiment with new,
advanced bebop improvisations and harmonies after big band performances,
most commonly at after hour jam sessions with pianist THELNONIOUS MONK in
HARLEM at the jazz nightclub Mintons Playhouse.


      After he established bebop in full with CHARLIE PARKER in 1946, he
then turned his attention to the music Latin America, namely Cuba, fusing
it with modern music from United States such as jazz, and creating a new
style known as Afro-Cuban jazz.  Gillespie was signed to a contract with
recording company RCA Victor, in which he began recording his Afro-Cuban
jazz compositions with a big band, such as Manteca and Tin Tin Deo (co-
written with his big bands conga player, Chano Pozo, in 1947.)  His
Orchestra performed and recorded bebop too, such as his composition
Anthropology, co-written with PARKER in the in the course of their small
combo work in 1945, and recorded by the Gillespie Orchestra in 1948.
Gillespie would become a cultural ambassador of modern jazz as early as
1956, performing bebop and Afro-Cuban jazz and touring the world with the
support of the US State Department, diplomatically promoting these and
other modern musics of the Americas.  He later formed the United Nations
Orchestra, and toured the world again with them.


       Gillespie gave modern jazz tenor saxophonist JOHN COLTRANE his first
start in improvisational focused small band work once the trumpeter
dissembled his big band in 1949 and formed a sextet.  Gillespie performed
and recorded with bassist CHARLIE MINGUS on a number of occasions, usually
in a quintet setting with CHARLIE PARKER on alto saxophone, much of the
time performing Gillespies compositions.  The quartet with PARKER and
MINGUS played notable concerts in the 1950s, and would usually perform
Gillespies compositions Groovin High and A Night in Tunisia, among
others that were bebop focused and written in the 1940s.  Gillespie was
awarded a Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award in 1989.  He died in Englewood,
New Jersey on January 6, 1993, at age 75.

References and Further Readings:

DeVeaux, S. (1997) The Birth of Bebop: A Social and Musical History,
Berkeley and Los Angeles, CA: University of California Press.

Gentry, T. (1991) Dizzy Gillespie: Performer, Bandleader and Composer, New
York: Chelsea House.

Giddins, G. and S. DeVeaux (2009) Jazz, New York and London: W.W. Norton.

Gioia, T. (1997) The History of Jazz, New York and Oxford: Oxford
University Press.

Horricks, R (1984) Dizzy Gillespie and the Be-Bop Revolution, Tunbridge
Wells, UK: Spellmount.

Maggin, D.L. (2006) Dizzy: The Life and Times of John Birks Gillespie, New
York: Harper.

McRae, B. (1988) Dizzy Gillespie: His Life & Times, New York: Universe
Books.

Shipton, A. (1999) Groovin High: The Life of Dizzy Gillespie, New York and
Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Vail, K. (2003) Dizzy Gillespie: The Bebop Years, 1937-1952, Lanham, MD:
Scarecrow Press.

Memoirs:

Gillespie, D. and A. Fraser (2009) To Be, or Notto Bop, Minneapolis, MN:
University of Minnesota Press. (These memoirs of Dizzy Gillespie were first
published in 1979, and recount his jazz career experiences with the likes
of pianist THELONIOUS MONK and trumpeter MILES DAVIS, the latter who he
performed with while a member of the Billy Eckstein Band.)

Dustin Garlitz
University of South Florida
