
Ginner, Ruby (b. 8 May 1886, Cannes, France; d. 13 February 1978, Newbury,
England)


Summary
Working primarily during the second and third decades of the twentieth
century, Ruby Ginner devised a new dance form called Revived Greek Dance
(later changed to Classical Greek Dance). Fully cognizant of the
impossibility of reconstructing dances from ancient Greece, she was
inspired by their spirit, movement principles, dramatic styles and contexts
of production. Extensive research on the artefacts, theatre, literature and
thematic narratives of ancient Greece informed the development of a new
movement vocabulary. With the mime artist Irene Mawer, Ginner established
her own school, and her work was disseminated in the theatre, in education
and through her published writings.

Training and Early Career
Ginner moved to England from France at the age of eleven. She studied
ballet and also trained as an actress. Whilst undertaking research on the
role of the Greek chorus, she became interested in its potential for dance
and movement. In 1913, she founded the Grecian Dancers and, shortly
afterwards, her own school. She developed a systematic approach to the
development of technical, dramatic and expressive dance skills through
engagement with Greek performance modes such as the lyric, gymnopaedic,
bacchic, pyrrhic, tragic and choric. Ginner claimed, for example, that the
Gymnopaedic and Pyrrhic produce physical elasticity, strength, control and
stability, Lyric dances give grace and beauty of movement, and the tragic,
ritual and Bacchic dances develop the power of using the body as a means of
dramatic and emotional expression (Ginner 1960: 169-70).

Contributions to the Field and to Modernism
Ginners career followed a two-fold trajectory, developing both in the
theatre and in education. With her artistic partner Irene Mawer and using
dancers from the Ginner-Mawer School of Dance and Drama and a growing
number of associated schools, Ginner presented choreography based on themes
from the ancient world and from nature. Her works were largely
choreographed to nineteenth-century classical music and costumed in simple
chiton-style tunics of varying lengths. Properties such as spears and
cymbals were frequently used, both because they served a narrative function
and demanded dexterity in their manipulation.  Presented in a wide range of
public venues, Ginners work culminated in a series of extremely popular
concerts during the 1930s for huge audiences at Londons Royal Albert Hall
and  inspired by the performing context of ancient Greek theatre  in ten
annual open-air seasons in Hyde Park. These productions included historical
and national dances as well as Mawers mime plays. In 1930, the company was
invited to perform at the Delphic Festival in Athens. In 1936, the Ginner-
Mawer dancers appeared in a live performance from the British Broadcasting
Corporations studios at Alexandra Palace in London, only a month after
regular television transmission had started.  A further indication of how
Greek dance had entered public consciousness was a cartoon which appeared
in the Daily Express on 3 June 1933, in which a group of politicians,
including Winston Churchill, are shown dancing in a park in chiton-style
tunics.

Parallel to her theatre work, but with more lasting consequences, Ginner
evolved and disseminated her codified system of dance training not only in
her own school but also through the education sector, including physical
training colleges. Her methods were absorbed by the Imperial Society of
Teachers of Dancing (ISTD) and in the Royal Academy of Dance Free Movement
syllabus. She was committed to the idea that the survival of a new dance
form depended on the existence of a sound technique based on a scientific
understanding of the body in movement.

Ginner was convinced of the importance of dance for physical well-being.
During the First World War, she taught classes in Greek dance to war
workers, a venture which highlighted for her its educative and community
functions. Ginner was also an advocate for classical Greek dance and its
modern form through her writing. She published two books and articles in
journals and magazines such as The Dancing Times.

During the Second World War, the School was evacuated to Cornwall.  When
the war ended, Ginner did not return to London but settled in Cheltenham,
where her theatre and education work declined. Ginner herself remained
active, and in 1968, she was awarded an MBE (Member of the Order of the
British Empire).

Legacy
Like so many others across cultural and artistic fields during the late
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, Ginner took her inspiration from
fifth-century BCE Hellenic culture. However, she transformed these
practices through the codification of a technique and highly crafted
choreography, to meet the demands of a growing modern dance phenomenon
which needed efficient, repeatable but artistically expressive methods of
transmission to ensure its longevity. She also privileged the dramatic and
lyrical capacities of dance, which she saw as under-exploited in the
theatre dance of the late nineteenth century. In general terms, the work of
Ruby Ginner and her British contemporaries such as Madge Atkinson and
Margaret Morris, resonate with a late twentieth-century resurgence of ideas
in dance about the relationship between the organic functions of the body
and its expressive and stylistic capabilities. Classical Greek Dance
continues to be taught under the auspices of the ISTD. The Ruby Ginner
awards for solo dances are presented annually, and every two years the ISTD
mounts a Greek Dance Festival.

Selected List of Works (dates approximate)
The Dales of Arcadia (1917)
The Call of the Sea (1924)
Fire (1925)
On Mount Lycaeus (1928)
The Masque of the Sea (1928)
The Armies of the Earth and Air (1929)
Greek Dances (throughout 1920s/1930s)
Lyric Dance for Children (1936)
Faun and Dryad (1931)
The Corn Harvest (1932)

Contact National Resource Centre for Dance, University of Surrey for a more
detailed list of works extrapolated from programmes held in its archives.

References and Further Reading
Alter, J. B. (1994) Dancing and Mixed Media: Early Twentieth-Century Modern
Dance Theory in Text and Photography, New York: Peter Lang. (A useful
extrapolation and comparison of principles and practice of early twentieth-
century artists and pedagogues)

Carter, A. and Fensham, F. (eds.) (2011) Dancing Naturally: Nature, Neo-
classicism and Modernity in Early Twentieth Century Dance, Basingstoke:
Palgrave. (An edited collection of eleven essays on how the natural
informed the development of modern dance in the early twentieth century in
the US, UK, Europe and Australia)

Churchill, E., Griffiths, L. and Roberts, H. (2009) The National Resource
Centre for Dance, University of Surrey, Dance Chronicle, 32 (3): 490-98.
(A description of the Pioneer Women: Early British Modern Dancers project
and its associated archival holdings, which include substantial material on
Ruby Ginner)

Ginner, R. (1933) The Revived Greek Dance: Its Art and Technique, London:
Methuen. (A guide for students and teachers)

Ginner, R. (1960) Gateway to the Dance, London: Newman Neame.  (Explores
the relationship between her Ginners work and Hellenic culture)

Macintosh, F. (ed.) (2009) The Ancient Dancer in the Modern World:
Responses to Greek and Roman Dance, Oxford: Oxford University Press. (An
examination of the impact of ancient Greece and Rome on modern theatre and
dance)

Manuscript Collections and Online Resources
The original archive of Ruby Ginner material is held in the Bice Bellairs
Collection at the National Resource Centre for Dance (NRCD), University of
Surrey. The online descriptive catalogue of the collection, including some
images, can be accessed via the NRCD Archive website
http://www.surrey.ac.uk/library/nrcd/archives/.

The Digital Dance Archives website (www.dance-archives.ac.uk) holds a
selection of images from the above archive.

Paratextual Material
Ruby Ginner. Image from Pauline Grants album from the Ginner-Mawer School,
1900s. (NRCD reference:  BB/F/1).

The following copyright statement can be shortened if the image is used:

This image is still in copyright and must not be reproduced without
permission.  Every effort has been made to identify the copyright owners.
We apologise for any infringement that may have occurred.  If you have any
information regarding copyright ownership of this image please contact the
National Resource Centre for Dance, University of Surrey.


Alexandra Carter

