
GODARD, Jean-Luc (December 2, 1930)

One of the most important filmmakers in the latter half of the twentieth
century, Jean-Luc Godards reputation remains enduringly linked with the
French nouvelle vague movement of the late 1950s and early 1960s, but his
protean work in film and video has spanned more than six decades, from his
first articles as a critic in 1950 to the planned release of Adieu au
langage (Good Bye to Language) in 2015, and in the process he has
repeatedly revolutionised conceptions of both his own work and of the
aesthetic potential of the cinema as a whole.

IMAGE BREATHLESS

      Renowned for its on location settings, its improvisational shooting
method, the performances of its two young leads (Jean-Paul Belmondo and
Jean Seberg), and the introduction of the jump cut, Godards feature
debut  bout de souffle (Breathless, 1960) was one of the landmarks of the
nouvelle vague, and its wide-ranging formal inventiveness retains a
freshness today. In some ways, however, the film represents a mid-point in
Godards early career, sandwiched between a decade of short films and
critical writing (above all for the journal Cahiers du cinma, edited by
Andr Bazin), and a nine-year period in which the prolific filmmaker
released 15 features, a number of which notably featured his then wife,
Anna Karina, in key roles.

IMAGE VIVRE SA VIE

      Enormously influential at the time, Godards work in the 1960s still
constitutes a major pole of attraction for cinephiles and those interested
more broadly in artistic modernism alike, and the impact of his films on
world cinema has frequently been compared to that of Picasso in the visual
arts or Mallarme in poetry. Addressing the profound political and social
transformations of France during this era, certain of his early films 
such as Vivre sa vie (1962), Le Mpris (Contempt, 1963) and Alphaville
(1964)  gained both critical and popular success. Others, however, were
subject to marginalisation: his second feature film, Le Petit Soldat
(1960), was banned for three years by the De Gaulle administration for its
references to the war in Algeria, while Les Carabiniers (1963) gained a
notoriously meagre box office return upon its initial French release, and
drew such ire from reviewers that Godard felt compelled to issue a four-
page riposte on the pages of Cahiers du cinma (Godard, 1963).
      If 1965s Pierrot le fou marked a high-point in Godards preeminence
within French cinema, it was also a moment of personal crisis for the
filmmaker, reflected in a sentiment of formal impasse: a text accompanying
the release of the film (Godard, 1965) plaintively asserted that the only
great problem in the cinema seems to me to be [...] where and why to begin
a shot, and where and why to end it? Attempts to answer this question have
consumed much of Godards subsequent career, and would initially lead him
to make films in a more markedly essayistic, fragmentary vein, such as Made
in USA (1966) and Deux ou trois choses que je sais delle (Two or Three
Things I Know About Her, 1966).

CLIP HISTOIRE(S) 4B

      The creative restlessness of this period was also marked by a
deepening political radicalisation, which, in successive films, led to
Godard presaging the rise of Maoist-inflected gauchisme in post-1968 France
with La Chinoise (1967), before announcing the end of cinema with Week-
End (1967), a vitriolic laceration of middle-class French life which was
also renowned for a 300-metre, 10-minute long tracking shot along a
congested highway. From this point, Godard embarked on a feverish bout of
militant filmmaking in collaboration with the young activist Jean-Pierre
Gorin. Adopting the moniker of the Groupe Dziga Vertov, the duos work in
this period culminated in the 1972 feature Tout va bien, which has since
become a totemic example of Marxist-oriented cinema  although, after
suffering a motorcycle accident in June 1971, Godards involvement in the
film was limited.

IMAGE TOUT VA BIEN


      The mid- to late-1970s saw Godard move away from Paris (first to
Grenoble, then to the Swiss village of Rolle) and dedicate himself to video-
based experimental work, focussing on the politics of domestic family life
and offering a critical interrogation of earlier models of radical cinema.
This shift was to a large degree provoked by his encounter with Anne-Marie
Miville, who has since co-signed a number of Godards works and been
integral to his output as whole. While this is the most critically
neglected phase of Godards filmmaking career, notable works in this period
include Ici et ailleurs (Here and Elsewhere, 1975) Numro deux (1975), and
two series of programmes made for television: Six fois deux: sur et sous la
tlvision (1976) and France/tour/dtour/deux enfants (1978).
      In 1979, the director made a high-profile return to commercial
filmmaking with Sauve qui peut (la vie) (Slow Motion). This film initiated
a series of works made in the 1980s, including Passion (1982) and Je vous
salue, Marie (Hail Mary, 1985), which marked a thematic turn in Godards
uvre in a number of ways: the urban milieux of his earlier work tended to
give way to more rural or natural settings, and a preoccupation with
contemporary social and political subject matter ceded in favour of
enigmatic ruminations on spirituality, art and European history.
      Between 1989 and 1998, Godards activity was largely centred on what
undeniably constitutes his magnum opus: the 4-hour, eight-part video
series Histoire(s) du cinma, which fuses a wealth of found material 
films, paintings, textual citations, musical pieces  into a multilayered,
frenetically-edited audiovisual essay. As Michael Witt (2004) notes,
however, this work can perhaps best be seen in conjunction with an array of
satellite films, essays, lectures, photo-montages and even media interviews
as a vast multimedia art installation, which can trace its origins as far
back as 1969, and which has progressively elaborated and re-worked a
central hypothesis concerning the history of the cinema.
      In this hypothesis, more clearly enunciated in interviews with Godard
than in the work itself, the cinema died at Auschwitz  not, as Theodor
Adornos thesis would have it, because of its inability to represent the
death camps, but because it failed in its historical mission to prevent
the Holocaust by providing a warning of the impending cataclysm, or, at the
very least, by showing the reality of the camps. Didi-Hubermann (2008) has
convincingly argued, however that for Godard showing Auschwitz requires
more than mere filmed footage of the camps, but necessitates the
intervention of a filmmaker to create acts of historical montage.

CLIP HISTOIRE(S) 1A

      Indeed, the theory and practice of montage has been of central
importance to Godards work since the 1970s. Paradoxically, he maintains,
following Malraux (1939), that montage is essential to the cinemas
specificity as an art form, while at the same time insisting that it is a
goal that has never truly been attained  even by such pioneers as
Griffith, Gance and Eisenstein. In this light, Histoire(s) du cinma can be
seen both as a history of the absence of montage in the cinema, and as an
attempt to retroactively rectify this absence through an innovatively
polyphonic approach to the editing of film images.
      The pessimism of Godards central historical thesis nonetheless leads
him to a gloomy outlook towards the present state of globalised culture,
dominated, in his eyes, by the homogeneous imagery of television, and this
despair only seems to have been further accentuated in Godards work after
the completion of Histoire(s) in 1998. Alongside the feature films loge de
lamour (In Praise of Love, 2001), Notre musique (2004) and Film socialisme
(2010), the most recent period of Godards uvre has been marked by a
number of striking short films and, perhaps most notably, by the
controversial exhibition in the Centre Pompidou, Voyage(s) en utopie
(2006).

IMAGE FILM SOCIALISME

      While audiences for Godards work may have declined since the 1960s,
the filmmaker retains a high degree of visibility in the mass media, and
his loyal following among critics and academics has produced a wealth of
scholarship on his work which, among a plethora of monographs, essays and
journal articles, includes no less than three biographies.

Further reading:

Didi-Hubermann, G. (2008) Images in Spite of All: Four Photographs from
Auschwitz, tr. Shane B. Lillis. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Godard, J.-L. (1963) Feu sur Les Carabiniers, Cahiers du cinma 146: 1-4.

Godard, J.-L. (1965) Pierrot mon ami, Cahiers du cinma 171: 16-18.

MacCabe, C. (2003) Godard: a Portrait of the Artist at 70. New York:
Farrar, Strauss and Giroux.

Malraux, A. (2003 [1939]) Esquisse pour une psychologie du cinma. Paris:
Nouveau Monde.

Milne, T. (ed., 1972). Godard on Godard. New York: Da Capo Press.

Morgan, D. (2013) Late Godard and the Possibilities of Cinema. Berkeley:
University of California Press.

Morrey, D. (2005) Jean-Luc Godard. Manchester: Manchester University Press.

Witt, M. (2004) Shapeshifter: Godard as Multimedia Installation Artist,
New Left Review 29: 73-89.

Witt, M. (2013) Jean-Luc Godard: Cinema Historian. Bloomington: Indiana
University Press.

List of Works

 bout de souffle (Breathless, France, 1960).

Le Petit Soldat (France, 1960).

Vivre sa vie (France, 1962).

Les Carabiniers (France, 1963).

Le Mpris (Contempt, France, 1963).

Alphaville (France, 1964).

Pierrot le fou (France, 1965).

Made in USA (France, 1966).

Deux ou trois choses que je sais delle (Two or Three Things I Know About
Her, France, 1966).

La Chinoise (France, 1967).

Weekend (France, 1967).

Tout va bien (France, 1972).

Ici et ailleurs (Here and Elsewhere, 1975).

Numro deux (France, 1975).

Sauve qui peut (la vie) (Slow Motion, France/Switzerland, 1979).

Passion (France/Switzerland, 1982).

Je vous salue, Marie (Hail Mary, France/Switzerland, 1985).

Histoire(s) du cinma (France/Switzerland, 1989-1998).

loge de lamour (In Praise of Love, France/Switzerland, 2001).

Notre musique (France/Switzerland, 2004).

Film socialisme (France/Switzerland, 2010).

Daniel Fairfax
Yale University
