
Natalia Sergeevna Goncharova (1881-1962)

One of the most talented and prolific of 20th-century Russian artists,
Natalia Goncharova was not only a leading member of the Russian avant-garde
in the years before the First World War but also achieved widespread
recognition afterwards for her work as a stage designer for Diaghilevs
BALLETS RUSSES. As a painter she was a leading exponent of NEO-PRIMITIVISM
but subsequently engaged in abstraction and RAYONISM, becoming one of the
first non-objective artists in Russia. Baptized by the press as a Russian
Futurist, Goncharova participated in avant-garde theatre, film and public
debates and engaged in the practice of face-painting as a means to pater
le bourgeois. In 1913 her one-woman retrospective exhibition in Moscow
attracted the attention of Serge Diaghilev who invited her to make designs
for his production of Le coq dor in Paris in 1914. A year later she
committed herself to a career in stage design, joined the Diaghilev company
in Switzerland, and never returned to Russia. In Paris in the 1920s and
1930s she became a well known easel painter, graphic artist, fashion
designer and stage designer. She die in Paris in 1962.

Natalia Goncharova was born in Tula Province, Russia, in 1881 and spent her
childhood on her grandmothers estate where she was caprivated by the life
and culture of the Russian peasantry, later a subject of fundamental
importance in her work. She trained at the Moscow School of Art where she
met MIKHAIL LARIONOV, her partner and life-long colleague. Her earliest
works were executed in an Impressionist style but from 1908 on she became
increasingly interested in the work of Vincent van Gogh, Paul Gauguin,
Henri Matisse and the Fauves and emulated their example. During 1910
Goncharova gradually moved beyond French modernism and engaged in a
distinctly Russian form of expressionist painting known as NEO-PRIMITIVISM.
Early masterpieces in the style include Washing Linen (Moscow: State
Tretiakov Gallery), Spring Gardening (London: Tate Modern) and The
Evangelists (St. Petersburg: State Russian Museum) all of 1910. Goncharova
deployed NEO-PRIMITIVISM as a weapon in a war of cultural politics waged
against the polite and refined standards of the status quo and her works
were considered highly controversial. Her apogee as a Neo-primitive painter
was achieved in 1911-12 when she completed two series of apocalypitc
paintings: The Harvest and The Vintage (component paintings diversely
located).

As a woman artist Goncharova was keenly aware of the limitations placed
upon women in her society and many of her works reflect upon those
limitations and adopted strategies to breach them. The Breadseller of 1910
(Paris: MNAM) and Loom + Woman  of 1912 (Cardiff: National Museum of Wales)
both expose, in different ways, the fact that women were victims of
economic, social and cultural forces beyond their control. In her own
practice Goncharova challenged the limitations  placed on women artists. In
The Wrestlers of 1910  (Paris: MNAM) she painted in a raw, expressive and
masculine manner whilst in her religious works she challenged the Orthodox
convention that only men could paint holy images.

During 1912 Goncharova became aware of Futurism and Analytical Cubism and
began to explore abstraction in works such as Woman in Hat (Paris: MNAM) .
She also adopted Larionovs style of RAYONISM and executed a remarkable
series Rayonist landscape and seascape paintings such as Blue and Green
Forest of 1913 (New York: MOMA). Shortly after Goncharova broke through
into non-objectivity in works such as Void (Moscow: State Tretiakov
Gallery) which explore the expressive power of pure colour, line and
texture. She played a key role at this time in the development of Russian
Futurism starring, for example, in the very first avant-garde film Drama in
the Futurists Cabaret No. 13 (Dir. Vladimir Kasianov, Moscow, 1913).
Goncharova may be considered, alongside LARIONOV, the leader of the
artistic avant-garde in Russia in the years before the First World War.

In 1914 Goncharova achieved remarkable public success in Paris with her
designs for Diaghilevs balletic production of Le coq dor, which were
executed in a vibrant Neo-primitive style. This led to a long collaboration
with Diaghilev and Goncharova subsequently made designs for the ballets
Sadko (1916), Les noces (1923) and Loiseau de feu (1926) in which she
began to reconfigure tradtional approaches to stage design. On tour with
Diaghilev in Spain in 1916 she was excited by the vivacity and colour of
Spanish culture and in the years that followed she executed an extensive
series of paintngs on the theme of the Espagnole (e.g. Paris: MNAM) .
Goncharova continued to work in the theatre after Diaghilevs death making
designs for scores of ballets, operas and plays becoming one of the most
respected and best known of twentieth-century stage designers. In these
years she also remained a committed easel artist and enjoyed success as a
graphic designer and ART DECO fashion and textile designer working for
Parisian haute-couture houses such as Salon Myrbor. In the economically
stringent times of the 1930s she returned to naturalism in her painterly
work but concluded her career in 1958 with an innovatory series of non-
objective works entitled Espace (e.g. Paris: MNAM) that celebrated the
advent of space-travel.

References and further reading:

Literature:

Bazetoux, D. (2011), Natalia Gontcharova: Son oeuvre entre tradition et
modernit, Bruxelles: Arteprint

Eganbiuri, Eli (1913), Natalia Goncharova. Mikhail Larionov, Moscow:
Miunster.

Chamot, M. (1972), Gontcharova, Paris: Bibliothque des Arts

Chamot, M. (1979), Gontcharova: Stage Designs and Paintings, London:
Oresko

Kemfert, B. & Chilova, A. (Eds.)  (2010), Natalia Goncharova: Between
Russian Tradition and European Modernism, Ostfildern, Germany: Hatje Cantz
Verlag (exhibition catalogue)

Loguine, T. (1971), Gontcharova et Larionov: 50 Ans  St. Germain-des-Prs:
Tmoignages et Documents, Paris: ditions Klincksieck

MNAM (Muse National dArt Moderne, Paris), 1995: Nathalie Gontcharova 
Michel Larionov: Collections du Muse National dArt Moderne, Paris: Centre
Georges Pompidou

Parton, Anthony (2010), Goncharova: The Art and Design of Natalia
Goncharova, Woodbridge, UK: Antique Collectors Club

Russian Museum, St. Petersburg (2002), Natalia Goncharova: Gody v Rossii,
St.Petersburg: State Russian Museum / Palace Editions (major exhibition
catalogue)

Sharp, J.A. (2006), Russian Modernism Between East and West: Natalia
Goncharova and the Moscow Avant-Garde, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press

Tretiakov Gallery (Moscow) (1999): Mikhail Larionov  Natalia Goncharova:
Shedevry is parizhskogo naslediia: zhivopis (major exhibition catalogue)

Electronic Sources:

Bowlt, J. (1990): Natalia Goncharova and Futurist Theatre, in Art
Journal, Vol. 49, No. 1, Spring 1990, pp. 44-51.
http://www.jstor.org/stable/777179

Kovtun, E. (1987), Experiments in Book Design by Russian Artists, in The
Journal of Decorative and Propaganda Arts, Vol. 5, Summer 1987, pp. 46-59.
Available at JStor (pay site)
http://www.jstor.org/stable/1503935

Kramer, C. (2002):  Natalia Goncharova: Her Depiction of Jews in Early
20th Century Russia, in Womans Art Journal, Vol. 23, No. 1, Spring-
Summer, 2002, pp. 17-23
http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.2307/1358963

