
Greek Modernism
With a call for bold conceptions and broad syntheses,  novelist  George
Theotokas presented in his 1929 essay Free Spirit the manifesto of  Greek
modernity: What position does Greece hold, he asked, within the creative
ferment of modern Europe? George SEFERIS, one of the main figures  of  the
Generation of the Thirties that forms the core of Modernism in Greece,  and
later a Nobel laureate, translated T.S. ELIOTs The Waste Land ( ,
1936) as he was writing his  influential  poetic  sequence  in  free  verse
Mythistorema, published in 1935. This annus mirabilis of Greek poetry  also
saw   the   publication   of   surrealist   Andreas   Embeirikoss    Blast
Furnace/ and the first volume of C.P. CAVAFYs  Collected  Poems,
as well as the establishment of the literary  journal  New  Letters/  
. That year also saw the publication of The  Nights  of  Phemius/
  , the last collection by poet Kostes Palamas, the nations
bard and a champion of demoticism in the Greek language question, but  also
a proto-modernist  who  experimented  with  verse  structure  and  temporal
mosaics as early as 1907 in his long poem The Twelve Lays of the  Gypsy/  
  . As Seferis noted in his 1963 Nobel Lecture, Palamas
was a most important critic whose wide  knowledge  of  foreign  literatures
proved that Greece is a  crossroads.  Explorations  of  the  concept  and
meaning of myth and free verse, spatial time, orality and  textuality,  are
all traits of Greek modernism created as a reaction to the self-reflexivity
of what Seferis called the generation of Karyotakis, after the Greek poet
Kostas Karyotakis and his poetry of disillusionment, and building upon  the
work of Palamas and  the  writers  of  the  1880s  as  well  as  poets  and
dramatists such as Angelos Sikelianos. Poet Nanos  Valaoritis  has  written
that Seferiss lengthy introduction to The Waste Land,  which  spoke  of  a
dialogue amongst poetic traditions, served as the modernist manifesto  for
the Greek poetry of the Thirties (Valaoritis, A Memoir).
      In the 1930s, an abundance of new literary magazines published foreign
writers and essays in translation; among them, a 1933 issue of The  Circle/
  dedicated to ELIOT and translated passages from JOYCEs ULYSSES in
the avant-garde magazine The Third Eye/ 3   in  1936.  Painter-poets
Nikos Engonopoulos and Andreas Embeirikos, as  well  as  the  future  Nobel
laureate ODYSSEUS ELYTIS, presented their experimentations in the spirit of
DADA and SURREALISM (in 1938 Engonopoulos translated poems by TRISTAN TZARA
and published them in the volume Sur(r)ealism I and Engonopoulos  published
his first book of poetry, Do Not Speak to the Driver/     
), and painters such as Nikos Hadjikyriakos-Ghika, Yannis  Tsarouchis,
Yannis Moralis and Spyros Vassiliou presented  their  work  in  Panhellenic
Exhibitions. At the same time, a dialogue on  poetry  and  the  meaning  of
Hellenism between Seferis and Konstantinos Tsatsos, Professor of Philosophy
at Athens University, became emblematic of the periods focus on  tradition
and the clash between what came to be known  as  European  Hellenism  and
Greek Hellenism. A search for immediacy in art  that  western  modernists
saw in myths and folklore art in general,  found  an  equivalent  in  Greek
letters of the time in an interest in the memoirs  of  General  Makriyannis
(1797-1864), the paintings of Hadjimichail Theofilos  (1874-1934)  and  the
long poem Erotokritos/ by Vitsentzos Kornaros (1553-1613/14). It
was in the 1920s and 1930s that folklorist Angeliki Hatzimichali worked  to
further progress the preservation and propagation of Greek Folk Art. Poets,
novelists, painters, essayists, architects, choreographers and  dramatists,
in both Athens and Thessaloniki, experimented with new forms and worked  to
find a modern analogy that could transpose their experiences into  art  and
thus translate modern Greece to a contemporary audience. The long  list  of
names includes, among many others, poets George Sarandaris, Theodoros Doros
and Nikos Gatsos, novelists  Elias  Venezis  and  M.  Karagatsis  (Dimitris
Rodopoulos), architects Dimitris Pikionis, Aris  Konstantinidis  and  Takis
Zenetis, painters  Konstantinos  Parthenis  and  Fotis  Kontoglou,  theatre
director Karolos Koun, choreographers Rallou Manou  and  Zouzou  Nikoloudi,
photographers Nicholaos Tombazis and Voula Papaioannou.
      In the meantime, the map of Greece was changing with  the  two  Balkan
Wars in 1912-13, the Greco-Turkish war of the years 1919-22, and the  influx
of refugees as a result of these, while the Metaxas dictatorship  (1936-41),
the countrys occupation by Nazi Forces until the end of  the  Second  World
War, the  civil  war  that  erupted  afterwards  and  the  1950s  period  of
reconstruction and Communist persecutions, left the country deeply  scathed.
SURREALIST poet and theorist NICOLAS CALAS wrote that the  First  World  War
lasted in Greece four years longer than it did anywhere else and came to  an
end only with the disaster of Asia  Minor  in  1922,  and  the  compulsory
exchange  of  populations  signed  at  Lausanne  in  1923,  while  the   two
generations of the interwar period, between 1922 and 1940,  finished  their
school days either on the battlefront or in Turkish prisons  or  they  spent
all their childhood under the nervous  strain  of  both  foreign  and  civil
wars (CALAS, The Greek  Door  to  Europe).  Since  some  of  the  leading
representatives of Greek MODERNISM moved from their lost homes  in  Anatolia
to the urban capitals  of  Europe  (SEFERIS,  Theotokas,  and  the  novelist
Kosmas Politis) and  others  either  spent  years  abroad  (ELYTIS,  Stelios
Xefloudas, N.G. Pentzikis), moved to the Greek capital  (Stratis  Myrivilis,
Angelos Terzakis) or lived as political exiles in the 1950s  (Melpo  Axioti,
Yannis Ritsos), Greek  MODERNISM  is  characterised  by  a  mobility  across
frontiers (Tziovas, Introduction, in Greek Modernism and Beyond,  3-4).  A
special mention should  be  made  to  novelist,  dramatist,  translator  and
travel writer Nikos Kazantzakis, a self-proclaimed student of Homer,  Dante,
BERGSON, and  NIETZSCHE,  whose  Zorba  the  Greek/  ,  written
during 1941-42, was the first in a  series  of  novels  presenting  mythical
versions of Greekness.
In 1936 photographs of the demonstrators killed  at  a  strike  by  tobacco
workers in Thessaloniki on May 8th prompted  Yannis  Ritsos  to  write  his
celebrated poem Epitaphios/ (the first book of modern Greek poetry
to be burnt together  with  five  hundred  others  in  1938),  which  Mikis
Theodorakis set to music in  1960  using  folk  instruments  and  untrained
musicians and singers. In 1962,  composer  Manos  Hadjidakis  captured  the
tragic atmosphere of 1945, when the  Civil  War  had  already  exploded  in
Greece, in his Lilacs out of the Dead Land/      ,
a selection of rebetika songs brought  over  from  Anatolia  by  the  1920s
refugees. As the period of reconstruction in post-war  Europe  brought  the
growing financial, political and cultural influence from over the Atlantic,
the overflow of imports also disseminated the voices  of  the  Beats,  WALT
WHITMAN and Bob Dylan to the increasingly socially aware Greek youth of the
1960s at a period when Greek modernism was also popularized with  a  wealth
of publications and poems set to music.
      From the late Forties onwards, a  suggested  orientation  towards  the
legacy of Eastern Orthodoxy and Byzantium came to counteract the  Thirties
look to the West, and Zesimos Lorenzatoss 1961 essay  The  Lost  Centre,
which called for a return to the metaphysics  of  Christian  mysticism,  is
considered the antipode of Theotokass Free Spirit.  After  a  seven-year
military dictatorship (1967-74), the modernist tropes had already  mutated,
as the  Metapolitefsi  era  [return  to  multi-party  democracy  from  1974
onwards] that was just beginning called for new narratives. Still, cultural
products such as Theodoros Angelopouloss films, produced  from  the  1960s
onwards and following the modernist aesthetics of  Elytis  and  Seferis  by
offering a non-linear narrative of identity, myth  and  historical  memory,
Stratis Tsirkass trilogy Drifting Cities, novels set in  Jerusalem,  Cairo
and Alexandria, or Stelios Xefloudass Odysseus, a novel by  a  pioneer  of
the introverted novel written in 1967 and  published  in  1974,  show  that
Greek modernism forged a resonant and distinctive way of  constructing  the
myths of a cosmopolitan modern Greece.

References and Further Reading

Primary Sources
Calas, Nicolas (1941) The Greek Door to Europe, Decision, I/2 (February),
45.
Theotokas, George (1986) Free Spirit  (1929),  tr.  Soterios  G.  Stavrou,
Modern Greek Studies Yearbook 2, 159.

Secondary Sources
Beaton, Roderick (2011)  Greece,  The  Cambridge  Companion  to  European
Modernism, ed. Pericles Lewis, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,  234-
246.
    A reading of the case of Greece in a volume examining the  many  facets
    of European modernisms, this introductory account of Greek modernism is
    useful  for  providing  an  outline  of  the  literary   and   cultural
    developments of the time.


Tziovas, Dimitris (ed.) (1997) Greek Modernism and Beyond: Essays in  Honor
of Peter Bien, Lanham, Maryland: Rowman and Littlefield Publishers, Inc.
    This anthology of essays  presents  a  view  of  the  course  of  Greek
    modernism, roughly from the 1930s to the 1960s, along its avant-gardist
    and  postmodernist  trends.  Targeting  the  reader  looking  for  more
    detailed accounts on the subject, the volume  includes  essays  on  the
    definitions and  precursors  of  modernism,  the  relationship  between
    surrealism and modernism,  as  well  as  comparative  readings  between
    different texts.


Valaoritis, Nanos, A Memoir, agendapoetry.co.uk,
http://www.agendapoetry.co.uk/documents/Nanos-AMEMOIR_001.pdf
    Nanos Valaoritis (b. 1921) is one of the first translators of George
    Seferis work into English and editor of the literary magazine
    Pali/ (1963-1967). Himself a prolific poet and critic, he published
    his first poetry collection in 1947 and in this interview for agenda he
    narrates some of his personal impressions of the 1930s poetic scene.

Voyiatzaki,  Evi  (2007)  Greek  Modernism  and  Inner-Oriented  Art,  in
Modernism, Vol. 2, ed. Astradur Eysteinsson and  Vivian  Liska,  Amsterdam:
John Benjamins, 2007, 991-1007.
    A short  yet  informative  introduction  to  some  of  the  main  Greek
    modernist literary developments. The reader can also  find  here  brief
    analyses of influential work by George Seferis and Stelios Xefloudas.


Katerina Zacharia ed. (2008) Hellenisms: Culture, Identity,  and  Ethnicity
From Antiquity to Modernity, Hampshire, England: Ashgate Publishing.
    This volume, introduced as a forum to reflect  on  Hellenism,  offers
    articles covering a wide period from the archaic to the modern era  and
    is a useful guide for those interested in the ancestry and afterlife of
    Greek modernism.



Konstantina Georganta





Paintings used:

   1. Yannis Moralis, Daydreaming (1959)

   2. Yannis Tsarouchis, Cafe Parthenon (1954)


-----------------------
Yannis Moralis, Daydreaming (1959)





Yannis Tsarouchis, Cafe Parthenon (1954)







