
Juan Gris (1887-1927)

The Spanish artist Juan Gris (born Jos Victoriano Carmelo Carlos Gonzlez
Prez) is widely recognized, alongside Pablo PICASSO and Georges BRAQUE, as
one of the key pioneers of CUBISM. Despite a career overshadowed by Picasso
and Braque, Gris developed a style of Analytic and Synthetic Cubism quite
unique to that of his contemporaries. Born in Madrid, he studied at the
Escuela de Artes e Industrias between 1902 and 1904, where he is believed
to have studied mathematics, the natural sciences and engineering. Deciding
to devote himself to art, he cut short his university education to study
with the academic painter Jos Moreno Carbonero. In 1906, he moved to Paris
and it was here that he became acquainted with the artistic and literary
ideas of the French avant-garde.  During 1907-14, he earned a living, and
then an extra income, as an illustrator and caricaturist for popular French
magazines such as LAssiette au beurre. It was in 1910 that he began to
paint seriously and in works such as The Eggs of 1911 (Staatsgalerie
Stuttgart) the influences of academic art and of Czanne can be seen. In
1912, he showed his work in important exhibitions such as La Section dOr
where he exhibited Man in the Caf (Philadelphia Museum of Art,
Philadelphia) and The Watch (Private Collection). Gris was never to lose
his scientific and logical temperaments and both are especially evident in
works around this time. He signed a contract with the art dealer Daniel-
Henry Kahnweiler in 1913 and subsequently became a full-time artist,
working principally, at this time, in the medium of papier coll. Rich in
colour and detail, his collages contain the contradictions and puns so
common to Cubist collage as well as an inventive incorporation of texts.
Excellent examples include The Table (Philadelphia Museum of Art,
Philadelphia) and The Bottle of Anis del Mono (Museo Nacional Centro de
Arte Reina Sofa, Madrid). 1916 saw the beginning of his architectural
period. In paintings such as Portrait of Madame Josette Gris (Museo del
Prado, Madrid), a portrait of his wife, we see Griss forms become larger
and flatter with fewer viewpoints. The clarity of line, construction and
form that was evident in works such as this made Gris very attractive to
the emergent PURISTS, who celebrated his work in their journal Lesprit
nouveau. Over the course of the next few years, however, his style became
more intuitive and fluid and in paintings such as Guitar with Sheet of
Music (Saidenburg Gallery, New York) completed just before the artists
death in 1926-27, we see an emphasis on correspondences between colours and
shapes. During 1922-24 Gris worked as a stage and costume designer. He
designed the sets and costumes for Gounods opera La colombe, for
Chabriers Lducation manque and for Michel de Montclairs ballet Les
Tentations de la Bergre, the latter produced by Sergei Diaghilevs BALLETS
RUSSES in Monte Carlo in January 1924. It was in this year that Gris
delivered his famous lecture Des Possibilits de la Peinture at the
Sorbonne giving a crucial insight into his life and thoughts towards art.
In 1927, following a long string of illnesses spanning seven years, he was
diagnosed with uremia. He died on 11 May 1927 and was buried two days later
in the cemetery of Boulogne-sur-Seine, where he and Josette had lived
during the latter years of his life.

References and further reading:

Antiff, M. & Leighten, P., (2001) Cubism and Culture, London: Thames &
Hudson.

Cooper, D., (Trans. and Ed.), (1956) Letters of Juan Gris (1913-1927),
London and Bradford: Percy Lund, Humphries and Co.

Green, C., (1992) Juan Gris, New Haven: Yale University Press.

Gris, J., (1989) Des Possibilits de la Peinture, Caen: Ed. Lchoppe.

Kahnweiler, D.H., Cooper, D. (Trans.), (1969) (first pub. 1947) Juan Gris:
his life and work, London: Thames & Hudson.

Moss, S., Le Vrai et le Faux in Juan Griss The table (1914), The
Burlington Magazine, September 2011, Vol. 153, No.1302, pp. 574-578.
http://www.burlington.org.uk/magazine/back-issues/2011/201109/

Poggi, C., (1992) In Defiance of Painting: Cubism, Futurism, and the
Invention of Collage, New Haven: Yale University Press.


