
Childe Hassam (1859-1935)

Along with Mary Cassatt and William Merritt Chase, Frederick Childe Hassam
is one of the United States best-known Impressionist artists. Hassam
enjoyed a successful and prolific career as a painter of fashionable city
streets and New England scenery. He was one of the founders of The Ten, a
group of artists whose annual exhibitions popularized the Impressionist
style in the United States.

Born in Boston, Hassam began his career as a wood engravers apprentice,
then worked independently as a childrens book illustrator. In 1882 Hassam
had his first solo exhibition, displaying watercolors of Boston and
Nantucket views at the Williams and Everett Gallery.

Around that time Hassam took formal art classes at the Lowell Institute and
the Boston Art Club, and in 1883 he took his first extended tour of Europe,
finding particular inspiration in the work of British watercolorists.
Marrying and settling into Bostons newly fashionable Back Bay in 1885, he
began painting large views of the city under various atmospheric
conditions. Executed in warm earth tones, these canvases reflected the
tonalism of the American artist William Morris Hunt as well as French
artists such as Gustave Caillebotte, who blended academic techniques with
Impressionist subject mattermodern life.

From 1886 to 1889, Hassam studied at the Academie Julian in Paris and came
to know the work of many of his European contemporaries. He now specialized
in Parisian street scenes, many featuring gardens and flower shops,
including Geraniums (The Hyde Collection, Glens Falls, New York), shown at
the 1888 Paris Salon. Brilliantly painted flowers would be a recurring
theme for Hassam throughout his career. During this time his palette
lightened dramatically and he began to adapt the freer brushwork, softer
colors, and light-suffused scenes of French Impressionists.

In 1889 Hassam moved to New York City, where for the next decade he
depicted the citys fashionable parks and streets. He exhibited frequently
and was accepted to New Yorks most current artistic circles, including the
Society of American Artists.
Beginning in summer 1890, Hassam made the first of many visits to Appledore
Island, NH, where he painted his friend the poet Celia Thaxters summer
home and garden, using brilliant colors almost straight out of the tube;
these remain some of his most popular works. Continuing the pattern he had
established in Paris, Hassam traveled extensively during summers, visiting
the artists colonies of Gloucester, Mass; Cos Cob and Old Lyme, CT;
Appledore Island; as well as Havana, Cuba; and the Pacific Coast. His
popular views of old New Englands fishing harbors, colonial homes, seaside
cottages, and white washed churches, while painted in a modern
impressionist idiom, conveyed a sense of American tradition, patriotism,
and social stability. As such, they contrasted with the Realist urban
scenes of Robert Henri, John Sloan, and the Ashcan School, which portrayed
the dramatic changes in urban life in the 20th century, including the daily
life of the working class and immigrants.

Throughout his career, Hassam actively sought opportunities to show his
work, and exhibiting with numerous artist groups such as the American
Watercolor Society, the Society of American Artists, and, in 1894, with the
progressive Munich Secession. In 1897, Hassam founded The Ten; exhibiting
annually for the next 20 years these ten artists formed the core of
American Impressionists.  Hassam was elected to the National Academy of
Design in 1905, when it merged with the Society of American Artists.

Later in his career, Hassam retreated to more secluded themes, such as
elegant apartments with contemplative women gazing out a window and nude
figures imbued with symbolic meaning. During World War I, he painted a
series of canvases featuring American flags along New Yorks Fifth Avenue,
several of which were donated to help the war effort. He also increasingly
turned to etching and lithography.

He died in his home in Southampton, Long Island, in 1935, bequeathing his
artistic estate to the American Academy of Arts and Letters.


References and further reading

Literature:
Curry, David Park. Childe Hassam: An Island Garden Revisited.  Denver:
Denver Art Museum in association with W. W. Norton, 1990.
Fort, Ilene Susan. The Flag Paintings of Childe Hassam. LACMA, 1988.
Hiesinger, Ulrich W. Impressionism in America: The Ten American Painters.
Munich: Prestel, 1991.
Hiesinger, Ulrich W. Childe Hassam: American Impressionist. Munich: Prestel-
Verlag, 1994.
Weinberg, H. Barbara. Childe Hassam: American Impressionist. New York:
Metropolitan Museum of Art and New Haven: Yale University Press, 2004.

Paintings:
Hassam, Rainy Day, Columbus Avenue, Boston, 1885 (Toledo Museum of Art)
Caption: This painting of the broad avenues of Bostons newly built Back
Bay neighborhood recalls the fashionable Paris street scenes by Gustave
Caillebotte and Jean Berard, who combined Impressionist subject matter with
more traditional academic techniques.
Hassam, Grand Prix Day, 1887 (MFA, Boston)
Hassam, At the Florist, 1880 (Chrysler Museum of Art)
Hassam, Geraniums, 1888 (Hyde Collection, Glens Falls, NY)
Hassam, Poppies on the Isles of Shoals, 1890 (Brooklyn Museum)
Hassam, Late Afternoon, NY, Winter, 1900 (Brooklyn Museum)
Hassam, Bowl of Goldfish, 1912 (Ball State University Museum of Art)
Hassam, Flags on the Waldorf, 1916 (New-York Historical Society)

Photos:
Archives of American Art, Smithsonian Institution
http://sirismm.si.edu/aaa/newPOA/aaa_macbgall_4732.jpg
http://sirismm.si.edu/aaa/newPOA/aaa_macbgall_4878.jpg

