Faiq Hassan								



Written by Tiffany Floyd 

339 words



Hassan, Faiq (1914-1992) Born Baghdad, Iraq



Faiq Hasssan was among the Pioneers of Iraqi modern art. Along with Jewad Selim and Hafidh al-Droubi, Hassan holds a premier position in the development of the Iraqi modern art movement and was a major influence for succeeding generations. Hassan became interested in art at a young age. His talent was evident and he became the second recipient of a government scholarship to study art abroad. While studying at the Ècole Nationale Supérieure des Beaux-Arts in Paris, Hassan was exposed to European modernism and produced copies of master works. When he returned to Baghdad after receiving his degree in 1938, Hassan took a position at the Institute of Fine Arts as the director of the Department of Painting and Sculpture. In this position, Hassan was able to focus on the education of young Iraqi artists and he went to great lengths to ensure that his students had adequate equipment and instruction. 



Hassan was also an active member of several art groups, including the Society of the Friends of Art. In 1950, the artist formed his own artist collective known as the Pioneers, Al-Ruwad. Beginning under the name Société Primitive, this group started as an informal assembly of artists who explored the Iraqi countryside for inspiration and subject matter. Hassan also founded the short-lived Al-Zawiya Group in the 1960s. Known as the “master,” Hassan worked towards achieving a technical prowess in his art that was revered by his students and colleagues. He moved freely between realism and abstraction, but favored Iraqi workers, villagers, horsemen, and landscapes as subject matter.    



References and Further Reading



Ali, Wijdan. Modern Islamic Art: Development and Continuity. Gainsville: Florida University 

	Press, 1997.



Jabra, Jabra I. The Grass Roots of Iraqi Art. Jersey: Wasit Graphic and Publishing Limited, 1983.



Modern Art Iraq Archive, http://artiraq.org/maia/ 



Naef, Silvia. “Reexploring Islamic Art: Modern and Contemporary Creation in the Arab World 

and Its Relation to the Artistic Past.” RES: Anthropology and Aesthetics 43 (2003), 164-

174.



Shabout, Nada. Modern Arab Art: Formation of Arab Aesthetics. Gainesville: University of 

	Florida Press, 2007.