
Lynn Kellmanson Matheny

Raoul Hausmann (1886  1971)

Raoul Hausmann, the Dadasoph, was an active participant in the Dada
movement in Berlin, authoring key manifestoes, co-founding Club Dada,
editing journals, and co-organizing the First International Dada Fair. He
declared that Dada was the only legitimate means of visual communication
and argued that everyone who liberates his innermost tendency is Dadaist.
For Hausmann, an artist could not engage with and critique the chaos and
violence of World War I within the confines of academic traditions. Artists
instead needed to search for new materials as a means for negotiating
modernity and its relationship with the past. To confront a shattered
world, one had to break some rules. Arguably Hausmanns most lasting impact
on modernism is his development of the medium of photomontage. Though his
claims to have conceived the idea of photomontage [] like a stroke of
lightning[i] are overstated (the technique dates to the nineteenth
century), his role in its development during the twentieth century is
nonetheless significant. Hausmann saw the cutting and pasting of
photographs as a movement away from the traditional materials of art and
role of the artist. Pictures culled from mass cultural sources became the
raw material for biting social critiques. By re-purposing images from
popular culture, Hausmann exposed their artificiality and challenged
viewers assumption that photographs  and the ideologies behind them  are
truthful.

Hausmann was born in Vienna and moved to Berlin with his family in 1900.
His earliest artistic training came from his father, an academic painter,
followed by formal art school studies.
Hausmann, along with Richard Huelsenbeck and others, was among the founders
of Club Dada in Berlin, which held its first evening in April 1918. By this
time, he had rejected traditional painting, arguing for an expansion of the
role of an artist and artistic materials. He read from his manifesto, The
New Material in Painting, declaring, You will come to see your true
condition in Dada: wonderful constellations in real materials, wire, glass,
cardboard, cloth [] but here for the first time there is no repression, no
anxiety...

Later that year, Hausmann traveled with fellow Berlin Dadaist Hannah Hch 
the two had a long-term affair  on a seaside holiday, where he claimed
photomontage was born. Looking back years later, he explained that the idea
that one could [] make pictures, assembled entirely from cut-up
photographs came from seeing military portraits through the villagers
windows. Families would personalize souvenir lithographs by cutting and
pasting a portrait of their beloved service member atop the head of an
anonymous soldier, which inspired Hausmanns own cutting and pasting.

Hausmanns art was not limited to photomontage. During the Dada years he
experimented widely, creating poster poems, sound poems, multi-media
assemblages, performances, and even designing a (never realized) Optophone
 a sort of image-instrument intended to translate light into sound and
sound into image.
In 1933 Hausmann left Germany for Ibiza, where his work turned to
photographs of the architecture and people little evidence of modernity 
recalling his 1922 statement that The task of the future is that of
achieving a new primeval condition. He eventually settled in France and
returned late in life to oil painting as well as collage and photomontage.
He died in Limoges in 1971.


References and further reading:

Benson, Timothy O., Raoul Hausmann and Berlin Dada (Ann Arbor, MI, 1987).

Bergius, Hanne, Dada Berlin: Texte, Manifeste, Aktionen (Stuttgart: Philipp
Reclam GmbH & Co., 1977).

Doherty, Brigid, Berlin, in Leah Dickerman, et. al., Dada (Washington,
DC: National Gallery of Art, 2005), 87-112.

Huelsenbeck, Richard, ed. Dada Almanac (London: Atlas Press, 1993).

Zchner, Eva, et. al., Raoul Hausmann (Muse dArt Moderne, Saint-Etienne,
1994).

-----------------------




