
Henri, Robert (1865-1929)

Robert Henri (born Robert Henry Cozad in Ohio) is best known as the leader
of the Ashcan School, a group of Realist painters who portrayed New York
City life in the first decades of the twentieth century. His works ranged
from tonalist landscapes, to full-length portraits of socialites and
performers, to an extensive series of ordinary people from different
cultures, many of them children. At the Pennsylvania Academy of the Fine
Arts in 1886, Henri adopted a Realist style, which he honed in Paris at the
Academie Julian. Back in Philadelphia, he taught at local art schools and
in 1892 formed the Charcoal Club. This informal weekly discussion and
sketching session included John Sloan and other local newspaper
illustrators, who Henri encouraged to become painters of contemporary life.
Henri studied the works of Diego Velzquez, Rembrandt, and Frans Hals on
several more European trips. In 1900 he settled in New York with his wife
Linda Craige (c. 1875-1905). Henris early works included small landscapes
influenced by Whistlerian tonalism, such as La Neige (1899). He established
his career, however, as a painter of large-scale figure paintings. He was
invited to join the Society of American Artists and the National Academy of
Design in 1903 and 1905, respectively.

In 1908 Herni and Sloan organized the groundbreaking show of The Eight at
New Yorks Macbeth Galleries to protest the restrictive juried exhibitions
of the National Academy. Henri and his circle garnered a great deal of
notoriety for their rebellious show, which opened up new exhibition
opportunities for younger artists working in innovative styles. Henri was
also involved in the large, unjuried Exhibition of Independent Artists
(1910) and the famous International Exhibition of Modern Art (1913), more
popularly known as the Armory Show, which introduced modern art to American
audiences. He continued his travels throughout Europe and the American
Southwest, often leading groups of art students. In these locales he sought
out interesting faces to paint, executing them in a quick and lively
manner. He increasingly became known for these typessmall, intimate
portraits of ordinary people, who embodied universal human values and
represented specific racial or national characteristics. Following the
color theories of Hardesty Maratta, in the early 1910s, Henri and his
friends began experimenting with a higher-keyed palette and a fuller
spectrum of colors, as exemplified by his portrait of the arts patron
Gertrude Vanderbilt Whitney (1916). Throughout his career, Henri was an
inspirational teacher to thousands of art students, including Edward
Hopper, Rockwell Kent, and Stuart Davis. The Art Spirit, a compilation of
his art and teaching philosophy, has been issued in numerous editions since
its original publication in 1923, and is still required reading in many art
schools.











References and further reading:

Homer, W. I.(1988) Robert Henri and His Circle. Ithaca: Cornell University
Press, 1969; rev. ed. New York: Hacker Art Books.

Leeds, V. A. (1994) My People: The Portraits of Robert Henri. Orlando, FL:
Orlando Museum of Art.

Perlman, B. (1991), Robert Henri: His Life and Art New York: Dover
Publications.
Sloan, J. and Henri, R. (1997) Revolutionaries of Realism: The Letters of
John Sloan and Robert Henri. Edited by Bennard B. Perlman. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.

[pic]
The Spanish Gypsy, 1912

Robert Henri (American, 18651929)

Oil on canvas; 40 3/4 x 33 in. (103.5 x 83.8 cm)

Arthur Hoppock Hearn Fund, 1914 (14.80)
http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/works-of-art/14.80

