
Ramli Ibrahim (b. 1953, Kajong Selangor, Malaysia  )

Summary
Dancer-choreographer Ramli Ibrahim has a unique heritage as a Muslim who
grew up in Malaysia, training in ballet, contemporary dance, and two Indian
classical dance stylesbharatanatyam under Adyar K. Lakshman and odissi
under the late Guru Deba Prasad Das. An engineering scholarship took young
Ibrahim to Australia where he studied ballet. He later performed with the
Sydney Dance Company and the Australia Dance Company. Ibrahim remarks, I
use a variety of genres as my tools. I refuse to be the slave of
definitions.[i] However, his abiding passion is with odissi from which he
innovates. Ibrahims work, remarks Leela Venkataraman, defines
categorisation . . . His creativity is an integrated experience
transcending national, religious and racial boundaries.[ii] Ibrahim is the
recipient of the Fulbright Distinguished Artist Award, 1999, and two
Lifetime Achievement Awards from Boh Cameronian (2003) and from Angarag
(2006), and the Indian Governments Sangeet Natak Akademi Award (2011).
Most recently, he was recognized as a Living Heritage individual by the
Government of Malaysia (2012).

Contributions to the Field and to Modernism
Ibrahim established Sutra Dance Company in 1983 in Malaysia. As Artistic
Director and Chairman of Sutra Foundation, he notes that sutra is the
thread that binds the nation.[iii] With Sutras multiethnic dancersnative
Malays, Chinese, and South Asians, Ibrahim creates works from Indian dance
and Malay indigenous forms like Makyyong and Menora, Malay marital arts
form of Silat and other works that cross genres. Ibrahim remarks, We can
define contemporary aesthetic now from an Asian point of view and not from
a Euro-American stance.[iv] He feels no conflict in using various movement
forms; however, problems arise with critics compartmentalizing tendencies.
Ibrahims technique of layering different styles, odissi with contemporary
dance, is a major choreographic strategy in his work. He is credited with
making odissi accessible to global audiences.

Ibrahims choreography is noteworthy for his use of space, and the way he
allows movement and music to resonate with the environment. Ibrahim draws
effectively upon key concepts in Indian aesthetics such as natya (a
combination of dance and drama), and rasa (human emotions as well as
sensory taste of food and of artistic quality). Ibrahim tunes into the
spiritual qualities underlying Indian classical dance, distinguishing this
devotional quality from literal religiosity. He believes that the spiritual
rasa of his creative dance rooted in odissi can communicate to audiences of
any religious belief. Such elevated feelings are not confined to temples or
mosques but can be accessed in any venue and via dance, as one form among
others that can inspire transformative states.
Ibrahim has choreographed over forty dances using traditional and
contemporary idioms. He created the piece Spellbound for twenty-two dancers
with elaborate sets, lighting, and musicians from Orissa. Ibrahim has had a
major impact on the performance scene in Malaysia organizing several key
festivals including The Sutra Festival, the Alarippu to Moksha Festival,
and the Under the Stars series, which  provide platforms for experimental
work by established and emerging artists. He is regarded as an
internationalist, a cultural ambassador of contemporary creative dance
that he showcases with his Company across the world.

Ketu Katrak

Notes
-----------------------
[i] Madhavi Puranam, Connoisseur of Dance, The Hindu, November 12, 2012
[ii] Leela Venkataraman, Dance Like a Man, The Hindu, October 24, 2004
[iii] www.sutrafoundation.org.my
[iv] Interview with Lalitha Venkat, on www.narthaki.com January 2001

List of Works

AffirmationsA Tribute to Tagore (2012)

Pray, Love, Dance (2012)

Vision of Forever, India Tour, (2012)

Alarippu to Moksha, (2010, 2011)

Stirring Odissi, International Odissi Festival, (2008, 2011)



References and Further Reading:

Venkat, L. (2001). Interview with Ramli Ibrahim, www.narthaki.com January
2001.
      (This interview covers Ibrahims biography and dance career, his
      interactions with Guru Deba Prasad Das, the establishment of Sutra
      Dance Theatre, how he balances classical and contemporary dance
      styles, and his innovative choreography.)

Citaristi, I. (2010). Contribution of Male Stage Artists to the Evolution
of Odissi dance, Sruti Magazine 205. October 2010, 15-19.
      (Citaristi provides a useful overview of Ramli Ibrahims significant
      role as a male dancer in the growing development of odissi.)

Puranam, M. (2012). Connoisseur of Dance, The Hindu, November 12, 2012
      (Puranam offers a discussion of Ibrahims dance technique.)

Rajagopalan, Kiran (2009). Interview with Ibrahim, December 10, 2009
(narthaki.com)
      (Rajagopalan discusses Sutra Dance Theatre as a model arts
      organization with talented artists along with the challenges of
      maintaining this venture.)


Venkataraman, Leela (2004). Dance Like a Man, The Hindu, October 24, 2004
      (Venkataraman discusses Ibrahims contributions with his company, his
      collaborations with other performing artists, musicians, poets,
      painters and actors.)



