
Henrik Johan Ibsen (1828-1906)
Download picture of Henrik Ibsen:
http://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Henrik_Ibsen_by_Gustav_Borgen_NFB-
19778.jpg


Henrik Ibsen  is  Norways  most  important  writer  and  one  of  the  most
influential dramatists of the second half of the 19th century. His  dramatic
production has left a deep mark on  Western  culture,  and  his  plays  have
revolutionized the European theatre, inspiring  generations  of  playwrights
and novelists such as George Bernard Shaw, James  Joyce,  Luigi  Pirandello,
Anton Chekhov and  Eugene  ONeill.  Together  with  Bjrnstjerne  Bjrnson,
August Strindberg, and Jens Peter Jacobsen, Ibsen is considered one  of  the
major exponents of the Scandinavian Modern Breakthrough, as well as  one  of
the early voices  of  European  Modernism.  His  early  dramatic  production
mainly consists of historical plays, verse drama, and poetry;  in  the  late
1870s, Ibsen started a  cycle  of  twelve  prose  plays  in  a  contemporary
bourgeois setting, which combine a marked taste for realism with a  turn  to
symbolism, especially in his later  years.  His  discussion  of  the  woman
question and of the moral double standard of the European bourgeoisie,  but
also the psychological study of his characters and the search  for  identity
they undertake, first made Ibsen a controversial  figure,  later  a  famous,
praised, and rich author. In the 20th century, Ibsen has  become  a  classic
of  world  literature  and  drama,  and  he  is  widely  read,  staged,  and
researched all over the globe. In  particular,  the  social  appeal  of  his
plays is still dramatically felt in developing countries  and  in  different
post-colonial contexts.

Henrik Ibsen was born in 1828 in  Skien  in  southern  Norway.  In  1850  he
published his first play, Catilina,  which  was  followed  by  a  series  of
historical plays of Norse setting  that  combine  the  stylization  of  late
Romanticism with a certain attention to the  present  world.  From  1864  to
1891, while he lived between Italy and Germany, his writing took a  decisive
turn towards modernity: first with the verse plays  Brand  (1866)  and  Peer
Gynt (1867), and later with a cycle of  twelve  contemporary  prose  dramas,
written  under  the  influence   of   the   emerging   Scandinavian   Modern
Breakthrough. The four plays published between 1877 and 1882 have  a  marked
realist inclination and are enriched by a peculiar  retrospective  technique
inherited  from  Greek  tragedy,  which  Ibsen  would  continue  to   deploy
throughout his production. By means of this  technique,  the  wickedness  of
the characters, their  psychological  crisis,  and  the  fall  of  bourgeois
morality they represent are  unveiled  through  excruciating  dialogues  and
confessions, often taking place in the setting of a bourgeois  home.  In  Et
Dukkehjem (A Dolls House, 1879) the young wife Nora is treated like a  doll
by her husband Torvald Helmer, who ignores that she falsified  her  fathers
signature in order to obtain a loan to pay for a trip  needed  to  save  his
life. When Helmer discovers the fraud, he is terrified  at  the  possibility
of a scandal that would ruin his career,  and  threatens  his  wife  with  a
prohibition against raising her children,  although  he  insists  that  they
must maintain a public mask as happy couple. This triggers Noras  decision,
greatly controversial for Ibsens time, to leave  her  home  and  family.  A
revolutionary work for the entire history of Western  literature,  naturally
linked to the feminist cause, A Dolls House is also a paradigm of a  search
for identity Ibsen explored in most of his characters and plays. The  succs
de scandale of A Dolls House was radicalized by Gengangere (Ghosts,  1881),
where Ibsen gave a merciless and lapidary description  of  the  bourgeoisie.
The apparently incorruptible  family  environment  of  the  unlucky  painter
Osvald is permeated  by  incest,  infidelity,  prostitution  and  blasphemy,
something that brought the play to be banned by censorship  in  England  and
Germany  but also to great appreciation in avant-garde circles.
      In 1884, Ibsens production took a turn towards symbolism,  a  current
which increasingly permeated his writings.  In  Vildanden  (The  Wild  Duck,
1884), the setting and  social  oppositions  between  characters  are  still
indebted to social realism, but the action digs deeper into the  characters
minds. The bankrupt Ekdal family, tormented  by  the  idealist  Gregers  who
wants to unveil the illegitimate birth of their  daughter  Hedvig,  keeps  a
wounded wild duck in the loft of their shabby attic, a symbolic space  where
the forces of the psyche reign. The duck, a symbol of the Ekdals happy  and
unconscious life, becomes the element around which  the  whole  play  turns.
Such psychological introspection is evident in many of the following  plays.
In Hedda Gabler (1890),  the  title  character  is  the  persistently  bored
daughter of a general who brings herself and her admirer Lvborg  to  commit
suicide. Ibsens moulding of her sinister power, where he  balances  between
realism (the tiredness of bourgeois life) and symbolism  (the  unveiling  of
subterranean forces that lead her to destruction), has  challenged  literary
critics for over a century. Throughout the 1890s, when Ibsen again moved  to
Kristiania (todays Oslo) as a wealthy and  renowned  author,  he  continued
his  evolution  towards  symbolism,  exploring   theatrical   spaces   which
gradually abandon realist settings.  The  bourgeois  home  of  the  bankrupt
entrepreneur in John Gabriel Borkman (1896) is turned into a  mental  prison
and a battlefield between contrasting psychological forces: Borkman  on  the
one side and his wife and sister-in-law on the other. In his last play,  Nr
vi dde vgner (When We Dead Awaken, 1899), the sculptor  Rubek  is  divided
between two women in a desperate search for artistic inspiration and  for  a
lost happiness. His days end tragically  in  an  avalanche,  in  an  outdoor
setting that is clearly permeated by symbolism and by the aesthetics of  the
avant-garde  in  general.  Although  Ibsen  had  laid  plans   for   further
playwriting, his health gradually worsened until his death in 1906.


Chronology of works


Collected works
* Henrik Ibsens Skrifter (2005-2010), Oslo: Aschehoug. 17 vols.

Plays
* Catilina (1850)
* Brand (1866)
* Peer Gynt (1867)
* Samfundets Sttter (1877)
* Et Dukkehjem (1879)
* Gengangere (1881)
* En Folkefiende (1882)
* Vildanden (1884)
* Rosmersholm (1886)
* Fruen fra Havet (1888)
* Hedda Gabler (1890)
* Bygmester Solness (1892)
* Lille Eyolf (1894)
* John Gabriel Borkman (1896)
* Nr vi Dde Vgner (1899)

English translations
* The Oxford Ibsen  (1960-1977).  Trans.  James  Walter  McFarlane.  London:
Oxford University Press. 8 vols.


Key Biographies and Monographs
* Meyer, Michael (1971) Ibsen  A Biography, Garden City (NY): Doubleday.
* Northam, John (1971), Ibsens  Dramatic  Method:  A  Study  of  the  Prose
Dramas, Oslo: Universitetsforlaget.
* Templeton, Joan (1997)  Ibsens  women,  Cambridge:  Cambridge  University
Press.
* Moi, Toril (2006) Henrik Ibsen and the Birth of Modernism, Oxford:  Oxford
University Press.
* Fischer-Lichte et al. (red.)  (2011)  Global  Ibsen:  Performing  Multiple
Modernities, New York: Routledge.


Timeline

1828  Ibsen is born in Skien
1850  Moves to  Kristiania  to  study  and  publishes  Catilina,  his  first
historical play
1851  Moves to Bergen to work as a scene instructor at the Norske Theater
1857  Moves back to Kristiania to work at the Kristiania Norske Theater  and
later at the Christiania Theater
1864  Moves to Rome for the first time
1866  Publishes Brand, his first philosophical play
1868  Moves to Dresden
1871  Publishes his first and only collection of poems, Digte
1875  Moves to Mnchen
1877  Publishes Pillars of Society, his first bourgeois play
1878  Moves back to Rome
1879  Publishes A Dolls House, his most performed play of all times
1884  Publishes The Wild Duck, his first symbolist play
1885  Moves back to Mnchen
1887  Makes a breakthrough on the German scene
1889-1891Makes breakthroughs in  England,  France  and  Italy,  followed  by
great controversies
1891  Moves back to Kristiania
1898  Great festivities at home  and  abroad  mark  his  70th  birthday  and
consecrate his fame
1900  Has his first stroke
1906  Dies in Kristiania


Websites and electronic resources

Henrik Ibsens plays, poems, articles and letters available  and  searchable
online: http://ibsen.uio.no/forside.xhtml

Henrik  Ibsens  digital  manuscripts  (plays,  poems  and  other  material,
account books etc.): http://www.dokpro.uio.no/litteratur/ibsen/ms/ms.html

Some    of    Henrik    Ibsens    letters     in     facsimile     edition:
http://www.dokpro.uio.no/litteratur/ibsen/ms/brev/brev.html

Ibsens     letters     to     and     from      Bjrnstjerne      Bjrnson:
http://www.dokpro.uio.no/litteratur/brevveksl/

Ibsen.net, a resource portal with  information  in  different  languages  on
Ibsen and his works: www.ibsen.net

The  Ibsen  museum   in   Oslo:   http://www.norskfolkemuseum.no/en/Related-
units/The-Ibsen-Museum/




