Taylor & Francis – Encyclopedia of Modernism



About you

[Salutation]

Anne

O.

Fisher



[Enter your biography]



[Enter the institution with which you are affiliated]



Your article

Il’f Il’ia Arnol’dovich and Petrov, Evgenii Petrovich

Il’f, Il’ia Arnol’dovich (ИЛЬФ, Илья Арнольдович) (Pseud. Of Fainzil’berg, Iekhiel-Leyb Ar’evich) (1897-1937), And Petrov, Evgenii Petrovich (ПЕТРОВ, Евгений Петрович) (Pseud. Of Katev, Evgenii Petrovich) (1902-1942) 

The writing duo collectively known as ‘Il’f and Petrov’ is best known for two early Soviet satirical novels featuring the wisecracking con artist Ostap Bender, The Twelve Chairs (Dvenadtsat’ stul’ev, 1928) and The Little Golden Calf (Zolotoi telenok, 1931). They also collaborated on screenplays, short stories, essays, novellas, newspaper columns, and an American travelogue, as well as publishing individually. Both the Russian Orthodox Petrov and the Jewish Il’f were born and raised in the cosmopolitan port city of Odessa, renowned for its humor and vibrant Jewish culture. After enduring WWI and civil war in ‘hungry Odessa,’ both moved independently to Moscow in 1923 and wrote for humorous publications, including the newspaper Gudok (The Steam Whistle) along with Petrov’s brother Valentin Kataev, Mikhail Bulgakov, and Yuri Olesha. After the success of their Bender novels, they started writing for Pravda in 1932, which sent them to travel the United States by car in the winter of 1935-1936, resulting in the travelogue One-Story America (Odnoetazhnaia Amerika, 1937). Their art’s ironic quotation and ambivalent intertextuality deeply influenced Russian everyday and literary language. Il’f died in Moscow in 1937 of tuberculosis. Petrov continued to write and became a war correspondent during WWII; he died in a plane crash outside Sevastopol in 1942.  

File: Ilf_Petrov.jpg

Figure 1 Il'f and Petrov at work (1932) - a widespread, but obviously posed image

Source: http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/a/a5/Ilf_Petrov.jpg 



The writing duo collectively known as ‘Il’f and Petrov’ is best known for two early Soviet satirical novels featuring the wisecracking con artist Ostap Bender, The Twelve Chairs (Dvenadtsat’ stul’ev, 1928) and The Little Golden Calf (Zolotoi telenok, 1931). They also collaborated on screenplays, short stories, essays, novellas, newspaper columns, and an American travelogue, as well as publishing individually. Both the Russian Orthodox Petrov and the Jewish Il’f were born and raised in the cosmopolitan port city of Odessa, renowned for its humor and vibrant Jewish culture. After enduring WWI and civil war in ‘hungry Odessa,’ both moved independently to Moscow in 1923 and wrote for humorous publications, including the newspaper Gudok (The Steam Whistle) along with Petrov’s brother Valentin Kataev, Mikhail Bulgakov, and Yuri Olesha. After the success of their Bender novels, they started writing for Pravda in 1932, which sent them to travel the United States by car in the winter of 1935-1936, resulting in the travelogue One-Story America (Odnoetazhnaia Amerika, 1937). Their art’s ironic quotation and ambivalent intertextuality deeply influenced Russian everyday and literary language. Il’f died in Moscow in 1937 of tuberculosis. Petrov continued to write and became a war correspondent during WWII; he died in a plane crash outside Sevastopol in 1942. 



File: Caricature.jpg 

Figure 2 Kukryniksy's caricature of Il'f and Petrov

Source: http://evrofilm.com/velikij-kombinator-satiry-i-yumora.html



Il’ia Arnol’dovich Il’f (pseudonym of Iekhiel-Leyb Ar’evich Fainzil’berg) was born in 1897 in Odessa. Two of Il’f’s three brothers were artists, and Il’f himself became a talented photographer; he is noted for his use of detail in both visual and verbal mediums. Evgeny Petrovich Petrov (pseudonym of Evgeny Petrovich Kataev) was also born in Odessa, in 1902. Petrov, whose older brother Valentin Kataev was an influential writer, had a talent for languages and the piano and a lifelong interest in opera. Both Il’f and Petrov moved independently to Moscow in 1923 and began writing for various light magazines and newspapers, notably Gudok (The Steam Whistle), along with Mikhail Bulgakov, Kataev, Yuri Olesha, and others.  



Il’f and Petrov vacationed together in June of 1927, quickly writing their first joint novel, The Twelve Chairs (Dvenadtsat' stul'ev, 1928), shortly thereafter. This picaresque adventure introduces us to Ostap Bender, a fictional NEP-era con man in hot pursuit of a hidden treasure; he is now among the best known characters in Russian literature. The sequel, The Little Golden Calf (Zolotoi telenok, 1931), satirizes bureaucrats, bureaucratic purges, and the ‘Great Break’ (Velikiy perelom), Stalin’s 1929 radical change in economic policy, and took far longer to write. In it, Bender claims to have ‘very serious differences of opinion with Soviet power,’ covertly amasses a fortune, and attempts, unsuccessfully, to emigrate.  



The Bender novels are so rich in contemporary realia that they’re recognized as ‘encyclopedias of Soviet life.’ They are also notable for their combination of broad and complex humour, their ambiguous narrative voice, achieved in part by sophisticated play with various levels of discourse, and for their desacralizing, ironic quotation of contemporary slogans, advertisements, and speeches. Both novels were enormously popular with readers, but met with mixed critical response; The Little Golden Calf was even temporarily banned from publication. Plans to write a third Bender novel never came to fruition. Decades later, the novels’ mode of ironic quotation influenced Vasily Aksenov, Venedikt Erofeev, and other writers who subverted the Brezhnev era’s ideological manipulation of language. 



In 1932, Il’f and Petrov were hired by Pravda. They wrote popular vaudevilles, plays, and screenplays, and traveled extensively as representatives of Soviet literature, while continuing to produce short stories and feuilletons for Pravda and other periodicals. Of special note is their column ‘The Belles-Lettres Corner’ (Ugolok iziashchnoi slovesnosti) commenting on the turbulent literary scene preceding the creation of the Soviet Writers’ Union in 1934.  



Their last main work was the travelogue One-Story America (Odnoetazhnaia Amerika, 1937), describing their car trip through the United States. Their many letters home from the trip give insight into their personal lives and the difficulties of the journey. Both Il’f and Petrov also kept notebooks for much of their lives, although only Ilf’s were widely published. Their partnership ended on April 13, 1937, when Il’f succumbed to tuberculosis. Petrov continued to write and became an influential editor. He died in a plane crash on July 2, 1942 as he was returning from covering the front.



Though Il’f and Petrov wrote individually as well as together, under pseudonyms and their own names, the Bender novels remain their main legacy. They have a dramatic reception history: the novels went from being banned in 1949 as ‘slander on Soviet society’ to being hailed as ‘classics of Soviet satire’ after Stalin’s death, while a Stagnation-era surge in Il’f and Petrov’s popularity was accompanied by accusations that they wrote ‘to order’ for the regime. 



Dozens of aphorisms from the Bender novels have entered the spoken Russian language as ‘winged words,’ placing Il’f and Petrov alongside Mayakovsky, Griboedov, Pushkin, and Gogol as the most quoted Russian writers. Il’f and Petrov were, in their own words, the union of a ‘mysterious Slavic soul’ and a ‘mysterious Jewish soul’ who rejected any word or phrase that they both thought of at the same time, reasoning that these formulations would be too common. This artistic rigor, practiced during the relative freedoms of the NEP (New Economic Policy) era, produced some of the most lasting monuments of early Soviet prose. 



From the Bender novels: 



Money in the morning, chairs in the evening.

Утром деньги, вечером стулья.



You provide the gasoline, we’ll provide the ideas.

Бензин ваш — идеи наши.



I am no cherub, of course. I don’t have any wings. But I honor the Criminal Code. It’s my weakness. 

Я, конечно, не херувим. У меня нет крыльев, но я чту Уголовный кодекс. Это моя слабость. 



Those bandits Marx and Engels made a fine mess of things!

Вот наделали делов эти бандиты Маркс и Энгельс! 



You are an interesting person! Everything in your life is in order. It’s amazing, how you can be so happy and still be a free man.

Интересный вы человек! Все у вас в порядке. Удивительно, с таким счастьем — и на свободе. 



How much is your opium for the people?

Почём опиум для народа?



But in Arbatov you have nothing to lose but your extra chains.

А в Арбатове вам терять нечего, кроме запасных цепей.  



There aren’t people like this around anymore, and soon there won’t be any left at all.

Таких людей уже нет и скоро совсем не будет!



Don’t make a cult out of food.

Не делайте из еды культа.



We’re strangers at this feast of life.

Мы чужие на этом празднике жизни.





Major Editions and Diaries 

(When of just one author, indicated in parentheses)



Dom s krendeliami. Izbrannoe [The Building with the Curlicues. Selected Works] (Il’ia Il’f) (2009) 

Previously uncollected works by Il’f.

   

Dvenadtsat’ stul’ev. Avtorskaia redaktsiia [The Twelve Chairs. Authorial Redaction] (2001)



Kak sozdavalsia Robinzon. Fel’etony i rasskazy [How Robinson was Created. Feuilletons and Stories] (2007)



Moi drug Il’f. [My Friend Il’f] (Evgenii Petrov) (2001)

Il’f’s commentaries to Petrov’s text and notes, as well as documents and articles on the coauthors’ reception history.



Neobyknovennye istorii iz goroda Kolokolamska. Rasskazy, fel’etony, ocherky, p’esy, stsenarii [Unusual Stories from the Town of Kolokolamsk. Stories, feuilletons, essays, plays, screenplays] (1989) 

Intended by Dolinskii to be the ‘sixth volume’ of the 1961 Collected Works.  



Odnoetazhnaia Amerika. Pis’ma iz Ameriki. Fotografii Il’i Il’fa [One-Story America. Letters from America. Il’ia Il’f’s Photographs] (2003) 



Sobranie sochineniia v 5-i tomakh. [Collected Works in 5 Volumes] (1961) 

Although compiled with ideological considerations in the foreground, still the canonical edition.



Zapisnye knizhki, 1925-1937. Pervoe polnoe izdanie [Notebooks, 1925-1937. First Complete Edition] (Il’ia Il’f) (2000) 



Zolotoi telenok. Avtorskaia redaktsiia [The Little Golden Calf. Authorial Redaction] (2003)



Zolotoi telenok. Pervyi polnyi variant romana. Podgotovka teksta i vstupitel’naia stat’ia M. Odesskogo i D. Fel’dmana [The Little Golden Calf. First complete version of the novel. Introductory article and textual preparation by M. Odessky and D. Fel’dman] (2000) 

The accompanying articles and commentaries interpret the novel’s political, historical, and ideological context (see their companion edition of The Twelve Chairs, also published by Vagrius.

Further reading:

The most important work on Il’f and Petrov, that of Yuri Shcheglov, has yet to be translated into English. This and much of the best Russian-language scholarship is in the form of commentaries; these are listed under ‘critical editions and diaries.’ There is still no complete collection of Il’f’s, Petrov’s, or Il’f and Petrov’s works.  



Secondary Literature: Articles

(Fisher)



(Fitzpatrick)



(Nakhimovsky)



(Siniavsky)



(Zholkovsky)



Secondary Literature: Books

(Milne)



(Préchac)



(Shcheglov)



Reception Studies

(Ianovskaia) 



(Kurdiumov)



Biographies 

(A. I. Il’f. Il’ia Il’f, ili Pis’ma o liubvi. Neizvestnaia perepiska Il’fa. Biograficheskii ocherk, kommentarii.)



Other Resources 

http://pjanse.home.xs4all.nl/Ilf-Petrov/index.html