

Impressionism


Impressionism signifies a movement in French art of the late 1860s and
1870s. Artists who participated in the formation of the movement include
Gustave Caillebotte (1848  1894), Edgar Degas, (1834  1917), Claude
Monet, (1840 - 1926) , Berthe Morisot,  (1841  1895), Camille Pissarro
(1830  1903), Pierre-Auguste Renoir (1841  919), and Alfred Sisley.
(1840  1899) These artistswho exhibited independently of the official
Salon in eight group exhibitions held in Paris between 1874 and 1886. They
adopted the label Impressionist to describe their project after it was
applied derisively to the techniques and devices they used to represent
landscapes and scenes of Haussmanns Paris and its suburbs, especially
pictures of bourgeois leisure. The Impressionists produced sketchy
paintings of natural landscapes and the spectacle of modern life to express
an essence of modernity. The movement fractured in the mid-1880s and the
core artists no longer painted or exhibited together. Originally criticised
for artistic incompetence, Impressionist paintings are probably the most
reproduced and popular works of modern art. The paintings that Monet and
Renoir produced in the summer of 1869 at La Grenouillre, a fashionable
bathing and boating site located on the island of Croissy on the Seine,
signalled the emergence of a specific painterly style we know as
Impressionism. Monet and Renoir developed a set of techniques appropriate
to the representation of a scene or motif under different and changing
conditions of light and weather. The preoccupation with an impression or an
effect and the apparently naive technical devices to accomplish it: sketch-
like brushwork, lack of conventional drawing, modelling, composition and
the juxtaposition of bright colour distinguish the Impressionist project.

The paintings that Monet and Renoir produced in the summer of 1869 at La
Grenouillre, a fashionable bathing and boating site located on the island
of Croissy on the Seine, signalled the emergence of a specific painterly
style we know as Impressionism. Monet and Renoir developed a set of
techniques appropriate to the representation of a scene or motif under
different and changing conditions of light and weather. The preoccupation
with an impression or an effect and the apparently naive technical devices
to accomplish it: sketch-like brushwork, lack of conventional drawing,
modelling, and composition, and the juxtaposition of bright colour,
distinguish the Impressionist project.

Jules-Antoine Castagnarys (1830-1888) review of the first Impressionist
group exhibition expressed lasting themes in Impressionisms
interpretation, namely, individuality and technique: They are
impressionists in the sense that they render not a landscape but the
sensation produced by a landscape. Monet, the most prominent Impressionist
in modernist accounts, concentrated on the analysis of the effects of
changing light and chose subjects that offered the possibility of achieving
this: poplar trees, haystacks, the faade of Rouen Cathedral, his garden
with ponds of water-lilies at Giverny. His painting was later interpreted
as a concern with sensation and the expressive possibilities and
limitations of a painted surface. For twentieth century modernist critics,
the Impressionist attempt to limn nature with utmost fidelity realised
the expressive autonomy of the physical medium. Impressionism was
interpreted as materialist and objective, detached and scientific,
preoccupied equally with the essence of painting and visual experience.

Writing in 1937 in Marxist Quarterly, Meyer Schapiro challenged formalist
interpretations of Impressionism to emphasis the rootedness of
Impressionist subject matter in the spectacle of bourgeois leisure, dance
halls, cafs, and theatre, individuality, and domestic interiors. T. J.
Clark (2003) described Georges Seurats monumental Sunday Afternoon on the
Island of La Grande Jatte (1884-1886) as an attempt to find form for the
appearance of class in capitalist society. The paintings made at La
Grenouillre, which may have been sketches for large works, Monets Bathing
at la Grenouillre (National Gallery, London) and Renoirs La Grenouillre
(National Museum, Stockholm), are scenes of bourgeois leisure in places
easily reached from Paris from the Gare Saint-Lazare. Understood as
unfinished and professionally incompetent, they are meaningful as records
of societys incessant transformations (Castagnary).

The artists most associated with Impressionism composed an informal circle,
known as the Batignolles group, who meet at the Caf Guerbois in Paris
under the unofficial intellectual leadership of Edouard Manet (1832 
1883). By 1871-72, an Impressionist style characterised the work of
different artists that identified them as a coherent group, a process
helped by the interest shown by the dealer Paul Durand-Ruel, who bought and
exhibited their works. In December 1873 they formed an independent
exhibiting society, the Societe anomyme des artistes peintres, sculpteurs,
graveurs, etc., and organised privately their first group exhibition
outside of the official Salon where artists usually went to market and sell
their works. It opened in April 15th 1874 at 35 Boulevard des Capucines in
Paris in the former studio of the photographer Nadar. Thirty artists
participated, exhibiting over two hundred stylistically diverse artworks,
the exhibition was relatively small by contemporary standards, and was the
first of eight similar exhibitions held between 1874 and 1886. The core
members included Monet, Pissarro, Renoir, Sisley, Degas, Morisot, and
Caillebotte. Devoted to success at the Salon, Manet refused to join the
Socit and never exhibited with them; Degas accused him of deserting his
fellow realists.
      The conservative art critic Louis Leroy (181285) mockingly described
the sketchy technique Monet employed in a lazily unfinished painting of Le
Havre, Impression: Sunrise (1873) in a satirical article Exhibition of the
Impressionists published in Le Charivari. The name Impressionist
became popular and was adopted by the Impressionists for their third
exhibition, lessening its pejorative intent. Degas, however, was unhappy
with the designation for future exhibitions, preferring independent or
realist denoting   the representation of the modern over historical,
mythical, or biblical themes. Impressionist was not the only name applied
to the artists who exhibited in 1874. Another politicised label,
Intransigent, carried different radical and democratic connotations to
the attitude of uninhibited individualism of Impressionist. The reviews
of the first show were not uniformly negative; Emile dHervilly writing in
Le Rappel compared fresh and gripping works to the nauseating
banalities of the academic routine.  Edmond Duranty saw in their
sketches an obvious originality and genuine discovery.

 Impressionism entered a period of crisis of representation or loss of
confidence in the mid-1880s for which aesthetic reasons are often given but
was symptomatic of changing conditions of artistic production generally.
The original group became increasingly fractured and stylistically less
certain; fewer of them participated in the Impressionist exhibitions.
Monet, however, did not abandon Impressionism but did return to exhibiting
at the Salon, writing critically of the daubers now exhibited as
Impressionists. He broke Impressionisms strong ties with Paris and its
suburbs, travelling widely across France to paint in different locations.
By the 1900s, the early controversies surrounding Impressionism had
subsided to become critical indifference and the once avant-garde artists
most active in its development were recognised and largely accepted names
within the French art establishment.



References and further reading
Blake, N., C. Harrison, D. Norman, with additional material supplied by F.
Frascina, A. Scharf and B. Thompson. (1983) Impressionism and Degas, Milton
Keynes: Open University Press.


Clark, T. J. (2003) The Painting of Modern Life: Paris in the Art of Manet
and His Followers, London: Thames and Hudson.

Francis, F. N. Blake, B. Fer, T. Garb, C. Harrison. (1993) Modernity and
Modernism French Painting in the Nineteenth Century, New Haven and London:
Yale University Press in association with the Open University.

Rewald, J. (1973) The History of Impressionism, Fourth, Revised Edition,
London: Secker and Warburg.

Tompkins Lewis, M. (2007) Critical Readings in Impressionism and Post-
Impressionism: An Anthology, Berkeley: University of California Press.


Suggested Images:

La Grenouillre - Auguste Renoir, La Grenouillre, 1869
Oil on canvas
Nationalmuseum, Stockholm, Sweden. http://www.nationalmuseum.se/sv/English-
startpage/About-us/Press-and-Media/Press-images/Det-moderna-livet/Auguste-
Renoir-La-Grenouillere/

Monet, Impression, soleil levant (Impression, Sunrise), 1873, which is in
the Marmottan Monet museum, Paris. http://www.marmottan.fr/uk/claude_monet_-
musee-2517
































