
Korea Japan Exchange in Art during the first half of the 20th Century

      In the late 19th century Japan, among the East Asian countries, most
actively embraced Western civilisation and thus emerged as the dominant
power of the region, while the 500-year-old Joseon Dynasty (1392-1910) of
Korea remained very conservative. Consequently, Korea collapsed, handing
over the countrys sovereignty to the successfully modernised and
Westernised nation of Japan and was controlled by Japanese colonial rule
for 35 years, from 1910 to 1945. Due to these political conditions, Koreas
initial introduction to Western art in the early 20th century was mostly
filtered through Japan. At the same time, the influence of Japanese art was
prevalent in the work of Korean artists. During the colonial era, Korea
nurtured a curiosity and passion for modern culture.  Painters began using
Western materials including oil paints and Western-style sculptures also
emerged. In addition, a modern system of art exhibition was implemented. In
previous eras, artisans working with paint, stonemasonry, carpentry, and
metal casting were somewhat scorned, and therefore had a very low social
status. However, as these new changes took hold, people working in these
media gained a newfound respect as artists, and became recognized as
painters, sculptors, and architects.
      During this period art classes were included in middle and high school
curricula, although most teachers were Japanese. However, there were still
no schools dedicated to art in Korea, so most young people who aspired to
become artists had to go to Japan to study. Many Korean artists studied in
Japan during the 1910s, including Ko Hui-dong(,1886-1965), Kim Chan-
young(,1893-?),  Kim Gwan-ho (,1890-?), and Na Hye-
seok(,1896-1948), who is recognised as the first female Korean
artist. Korean art students continued to pursue their studies in Japan
through the 1930s, attending both government schools, such as the Tokyo
School of Fine Arts, and private institutions, including the Imperial Art
School or Bunka Gakuen. Most of these students eventually returned to Korea
to pursue their artwork, thus providing the foundation for modern art in
Korea.
      Whether studying at public or private Japanese art schools, Korean
artists initially received education and training that was based heavily on
European Academism. By the 1920s, however, various experimental branches of
European art, including Fauvism, German Expressionism, Dadaism, Surrealism,
Russian Constructivism, and Abstract Art, were introduced and incorporated
into the Japanese art field. Nonetheless, there were still very few Korean
painters, and they had almost no opportunity to directly view the original
works of these various genres. Thus, Korean artists practicing Western
style painting predominantly produced nudes or figures in the filtered
style of Academism and Impressionism that they had been exposed to in
Japan, or else made landscape paintings that featured some elements of
Impressionism or Fauvism.
      While female nudes, self-portraits, and scenes of daily lives were new
subjects for art, landscape paintings in the Impressionist style were more
familiar and thus easier to accept for modern Korean artists. Painters like
Oh Chiho (,1905-1982) and Kim Ju-gyung (,1902-?) began to
observe outdoor landscapes at different times of the year, painting the
natural scenes with a kaleidoscope of vibrant colors. Under the influence
of Impressionism, painters captured not only famous scenic spots like Mt.
Geumgang, a favored subject of Korean traditional paintings, but also the
seemingly mundane landscapes of their everyday surroundings and modernised
urban spaces.
      On the other hand, artists such as Kim Whanki (,1913-1974) and
Yoo Young-kuk (,1916-2002) played an active part in 1930s Japanese
art, with their experiments in various types of abstract art. They
primarily focused on works of geometric abstraction, often exhibiting
together with a Japanese group called the Association of Free Artists.
However, abstract art was heavily criticized by mainstream artists,
including Oh Chiho, and furthermore, did not receive much attention from
the Korean art field.
      Some Koreans interested in ink painting also went to Japan to study
Nihonga, (modern Japanese painting). The representative example of such
painters is Kim Un-ho (, 1892-1979), who pioneered a new style
characterised by highly elaborate depictions and the use of fine, flat
colors. Meanwhile, Yi Sang-beom (,1897-1972) and Byeon Gwan-sik
(,1899-1976) produced traditional ink wash landscapes, but they also
incorporated a Western perspective by depicting the pure, natural ambience
of ordinary rural landscapes, based on actual observations or scenes from
daily life. After Independence, however, Kim Un-ho and his students were
disparaged for their Nihonga style. Thus, since the 1950s, Eastern
paintings in Korea have primarily consisted of ink wash landscapes.
      In the early phase of Korean modern art, Western art trends and
movements were chiefly introduced via Japan, and this process resulted in
some interesting phenomena that should be noted. First, the majority of art
terms, including many that are still in use today, were first translated
into Japanese and then transferred to Korea. Second, a clear division arose
between Western style paintings and Eastern paintings. Typically in the
West, paintings are categorised strictly by materials, e.g., oil paints,
pastels, frescoes, etc. In Korea, on the other hand, traditional paintings
are categorized as Eastern paintings, while oil and watercolor paintings
are categorised as Western style paintings. This mode of categorisation
originates from Japan, where Nihonga, modern Japanese paintings were
classified independently from Yoga, Western style paintings. Third, in both
Korea and Japan, interest in Post-Impressionism and Fauvism was relatively
strong and persistent, while Cubism never became influential. Surrealism,
however, was very popular in Japan, but virtually nonexistent in the Korean
art field. The reasons for this are not clear, but it is worth noting that
Surrealism was introduced to Korea in the late 1930s, at the same time that
the Pacific War was beginning. As a colony of Japan, Korea was called on to
aid the war effort, so most cultural activities were put on hold during
this period.
      Direct exchanges with Europe and American art, as the embodiment of
Western art, only became possible after Independence in 1945 and the Korean
War in 1950. Only then did Korean artists began studying and exhibiting
their works in Europe and the U.S., and thus become more widely and deeply
assimilated into the flow of international art.

References and Further Reading


Kim, Youngna, (2005) 20th Century Korean Art, London: Lawrence King


___________, (2001) Artistic Trends in Korean Painting during the 1930s,
in War, Occupation and Creativity, Japan and East Asia 1920-1960, Thomas
Rimer and Marlene Mayo, eds., Honolulu: The University of Hawaii Press, 121-
146.


____________, (2013) A Brief History of Korean Modern Art, in The Korean
Art, The Power of Now, Amir Sadeghi, ed., London: Transglobe, 10-17.
