
Japonisme

The term Japonisme refers to the reception of Japanese art products and
stylistic forms in Europe and the United States occurring in the second
half of the 19th century and continuing until the early 20th century.
Japonisme involves the collecting of Japanese products by Western artists
and art lovers as well as the adaptation of East Asian motifs and forms for
the invention of pictures and objects. Paris was the centre of early
Japonisme; the first collectors were art critics such as Ernest Chesneau or
Philippe Burty. Early enthusiasts of the Japanese arts and crafts were the
painters Edouard Manet and James Abbott McNeill Whistler. The opening up of
new possibilities for the representation of reality that was mediated by
Japanese colour woodcuts from artists such as Utagawa (And) Hiroshige had
profound effect on artistic schools ranging from Impressionism to
Expressionism. Not only the means of Japanese design, but also the egality
of the represented subjects, the equal treatment of nature, animals and
man, of high art and handicraft, helped Western artists to overcome their
academic traditions. Japonisme as an artistic and visual movement underwent
a trans-cultural appropriation of the Japanese stylistic language, which
contributed to the breakthrough of modern art in the West.


The starting point for the development and centre of the early Japonisme is
Paris. After a rigorous restriction on overseas trade that existed since
the end of the 16th century Japan re-opened on the Western market in 1854
and began exporting its own products. Japanese woodcuts by artists such as
Katsushika Hokusai, Hiroshige, Kitagawa Utamaro, Suzuki Harunobu or
Hishikawa Moronobu drew great interest in France, where they initially
arrived as packing material for export goods such as tea or ceramics. The
prints - also referred to as ukiyo-e, meaning images of a serene,
evanescent world - were received with great enthusiasm by writers and art
critics as there were the brothers Edmond and Jules de Goncourt, Burty or
Chesneau. Burty 1872 coined the term Japonisme in the journal La
Renaissance littraire et artistique.

Early Japonisme enthusiasts - for example Manet, Whistler and or Edgar
Degas - were supplied with Asian products of all kinds by Parisian stores
like the Jonque Chinoise or the Porte Chinoise. The colour woodcuts
especially served as a source of inspiration for the development of their
own artistic work. The abstraction of the basic shapes, the displacements,
rotations, foreshortening and variable enlargements of the motifs, the
different scales in one and the same depiction and the mostly plane
pictorial space occurring in the prints opened a way out of the stylistic
crisis in which many European artists felt to be. Edmond de Goncourt noted
in his diary in 1884: No more and no less than a revolution in the seeing
of the European people, this is the Japonisme.



From the selectively occurring enthusiasm in the 1850s and 1860s, a broad
movement developed in Europe and North America in the following decades.
The import of handcrafted goods from Japan was systematized and improved.
The most successful trader of East Asian art was the merchant Samuel
(Siegfried) Bing, who founded the journal Le Japon artistique in 1888. The
importance of Japonisme for modern art can be traced even beyond the turn
of the century in works of artists such as Claude Monet, Vincent Van Gogh,
Gustav Klimt, Franz Marc and Pablo Picasso.




References and further reading


Irvine, G. (2013) Japonisme and the rise of the modern art movement: the
arts of the Meiji period, The Khalili Collection, London: Thames & Hudson.

Weisberg, G. P., ed. (2011) The Orient expressed: Japans influence on
Western art, 1854-1918, Seattle, Washington et al.: University of
Washington Press.

Wichmann, S. (2007) Japonisme, The Japanese influence on Western art since
1858, London: Thames & Hudson.

Ono, A. (2003) Japonisme in Britain: Whistler, Menepes, Henry, Hornel and
the nineteenth-century Japan, London: RoutledgeCurzon.

Berger, K. (1980) Japonismus in der westlichen Malerei, 1860-1920, Munich:
Prestel.


Images

[pic]

Utagawa (And) Hiroshige, Fireworks at Ryogoku Bidge (Ryogoku Hanabi), No.
98 from One Hundred Famous Views of Edo (Meisho Edo Hyakkei), 1858, colour
woodcut, 36.2 x 23.5 cm (sheet), 34 x 22.5 cm (image), Brooklyn Museum,
Gift of Anna Ferris (Accession No. 30.1478.98)
https://www.brooklynmuseum.org/opencollection/objects/121712/Fireworks_at_Ry
ogoku_Ryogoku_Hanabi_No._98_from_One_Hundred_Famous_Views_of_Edo



[pic]

James Abbott McNeill Whistler, Nocturne in Black and Gold, The Falling
Rocket, 1875, oil on panel, 60,2 x 46,7 cm, Detroit Institute of Arts, Gift
of Dexter M. Ferry, Jr. (Accession No. 46.309)
http://www.dia.org/object-info/7d1a59d3-6163-440a-925a-b0978f1f8811.aspx




