
Orellana, Joaqun (1937 -- )
Laura Novoa


He was the creator of  a new lutheria called tiles  sonoros   [sound
tools], used in combination with other traditional instruments in his
Cantata dialctica (1974) as well as in Primitiva grande  (1975)  and
Hbrido a presin (1982) among others.  He has sought to  expand  the
traditional tymbric universe and at the same time to  connect  it  to
the social, political and material realities of his  country  takeing
up the marimba as a symbol of the Guatemalan sonorous landscape.
His work, which comprises traditional compositions for  orchestra  as
well as electroacustic ones, is permeated  by  the  preoccupation  of
attempting to integrate and give  expression  to  the  latent  social
tensions of the Latinamerican scene.  One of the principles on  which
his  ideological   music    is   based,   according   to   Graciela
Paraskevadis, the  use  of  recordings  taken  directly  from  crude
Guatemalan sonorous reality, without manipulation, to which  he  then
applies minimum composing procedures connected to concrete music.  In
this, Humanofona I (1971) and Humanofona II (1972) are emblematic.
Orellana was born in Guatemala and pursued  musical  studies  at  the
National Conservatory with Augusto Ardenois,  Jos  Castaeda,  Franz
Ippisch in composition and in violin with Carlos Ciudad Real.  In  an
initial stage which, according to  Dieter  Lehnhoff,  stretches  from
1957 to 1967, he  composed  fifteen  works,  two  of  which  received
prizes, El Jardn Encantado  (The  Enchanted  Garden,  1958)  and  Un
extrao     personaje     (A      Bizarre      Character,      1964).

With his piece Contrastes. Tema y Variaciones para orquesta  y  cinta
magntica he obtained a grant to study in Buenos Aires  between  1967
and 1969 at the Centro Latinoamericano de  Altos  Estudios  Musicales
dependant on the Instituto  Di  Tella,  a  stint  which  would  prove
definitive in defining his musical aesthetics  and  thoughts  in  the
future.  There he came into contact with  the  avant-garde  languages
and aesthetics,  especially  with  the  electronic  music  under  the
guidance of Francisco Krpfl.  In this period he composed  his  first
electronic piece Metora  (1968)  and  the  Quartette  N  2  Frater
Ignotus for two violins, viola and violoncello.
Once back in  Guatemala,  where  the  material  and  technical  means
afforded by an electroacoustic music laboratory was not available, he
produced his first Humanofona (1971) in a small studio in  the  city
with microphonic sources  of  urban  sounds  in  his  daily  sonorous
landscape (turbulent crowd sounds,  protests,  meetings,  phonems  of
indigenous languages, etc.) with the purpose of projecting a  certain
social circumstance.  In this context he created the utilera  sonora
(sound tools) derived from  the  marimba,  an  indigenous  instrument
constantly present in Guatemalan sound.
His Sonarimba became the first  of  a  series  of  tools  (Tecoclac
(1977), Circumar (1984), Frobui (1997)), its name deriving  from  the
fusion of the names of two instruments: the sonaja [rattle]  and  the
marimba.   Later  on  Orellana  incorporated  the  sounds  of   other
materials to his tools, such as wood, metal or plastic. His  declared
purpose was to take the marimba to another sonorous dimensions stage,
creating a kind of marimba fantstica.  This constructive  work  upon
the instrument later stimulated him to compose Evocacin profunda  de
una marimba (1984) for marimba,  mixed  choir,  five  flutes  dolces,
recitator and magnetic tape and Ramajes  de  una  marimba  imaginaria
(Branches of an imaginary marimba) (1990).
During the seventies he continued to defend  his  aesthetic  in  such
works as Cantata dialectica (1974)  for  symphonic  orchestra,  mixed
choir, sonorous tools, as he also did with his electroacoustic  works
Primitiva I  (1973),  Asediado  asediante  (Pursued  pursuer,  1975),
Rupestre en el futuro (Rupestral  in  the  future,  1979),  as  well,
though in a more indirect way, nearing scenic works with Tzulumanach
(1979)  and   Santanadasatn   (1981).    His   activities   combined
composition with teaching and divulgation  in  which  stand  out  the
foundation of the Grupo de Experimentacin  Musical  in  1974  and  a
short while later the organization of workshops of experimental music
between 1977 and 1982.
His international projection took  off  when  he  taught  courses  in
Contemporary Latinamerican Music in Uruguay and in  Brazil.   It  was
here that the  music  and  ideas  of  Orellana  became  for  a  whole
generation of young composers a possible configuration with which  to
articulate an avantguard language with a Latinamerican aimed  content
sensitized with its acoustic environment.
During the eighties, Orellana went deeper into  his  intent  to  give
expression to Guatemalan  reality  through  his  music.   Ideological
content manifests itself even more  strongly  in  Imposible  a  la  X
(imgenes de una historia en redondo) (Impossible to the  nth  degree
(Images of a tale in the round)) (1980) elec., that, continuing  what
had been started in Homofonas, picks up once more the crude  picture
of the conditions of repression and misery, as of mulo Lipolidn  in
La Tumba de Gran Lengua (2001) based on the work of Miguel  Angel  de
Asturias, Socratvica (1998  1999) for mixed choir,  sonorous  tools
and marimba, dedicated to the memory of  the  victims  of  Rio  Negro
1982, Tanajunarin (Rituales de Origen)  of  La  Profeca  (1990)  and
Balada de la migrante muerta en el camino  (2007).   Equally  in  the
Canto de Justina (Song of Justina) in  Los  Cerros  de  Ilm  (1992),
censored  during  the  government  of  Jorge   Serrano   Elas,   the
protagonist is a revolutionary romantic, a young native Indian  girl,
a mythological character abused by the authority of the characters of
a mystical police officer, a colonel and  his  henchmen.   In  this
work the composer attempted to integrate, as he did  in  others,  the
reality of the natives world by working with phonems the  intent  of
which is to emulate Indian tongue.
El violin valsante de Huisderio Armadel (1984),  autobiographical  in
character,  attempts  to  show  the  tension  between  the   sonorous
expression of the social conflict and its rejection by the  so-called
cultured sectors, by using traditional means, a violin and a piano.
In his catalog atonal language melds with tonal as well as  with  the
incursion of alleatory systems.
Orellanas  contribution  to  the  modernization  of  the  Guatemalan
artistic scene has been amply acknowledged as have been his endeavors
to integrate in his music the silenced voices of the realities within
his country.  His reflections have been written down  in  his  essays
Hacia un  lenguaje  propio  de  Latinoamrica  en  la  msica  actual
(Towards a language of its own in present day music in Latin America)
(1977), Recuento de una Labor (Diary  of  a  labor)  (1982),  Algunos
aspectos sobre la  nocin  de  paisaje  sonoro.   Sensibilizacin  al
entorno acstico. (Some aspects on the idea of a sonorous  landscape.
Sensitivity to the acoustic environment) (1983).
He presently lives in Guatemala  where  he  continues  composing  and
teaching.




Bibliographic referentes

Orellana J., Recuento de una labor, Guatemala, Editorial Jos Pineda
Ibarra, 1982.
-------------, El violn valsante de Huis Armadle, Guatemala, Editorial
Cultura, 2007.
-------------,Hacia un lenguaje propio de Latinoamrica en msica actual.
En: Revista Cultura de Guatemala, Ao 16, vol.4, 1995, pp.69-85
-------------, Amor a la marimba de Guatemala. En: Anuario Musical 2001,
Cultura                 de Guatemala. Segunda poca: Ao XXII. Vol IV,
sep.dic 2001. Guatemala: Instituto de Musicologa, Universidad Rafael
Landvar, 2001

Orellana Joaqun y Ana Mara Cofio, Sinfona delirante, Guatemala, 1998.

Berganza Gustavo, Joaqun Orellana conversa con Gustavo Berganza, Ciudad de
Guatemala, Coleccin Pensamiento editorial Cultural de Espaa, 2007.

De Gandarias, Igor. La msica electroacstica en Guatemala,
http://www.latinoamerica-musica.net/pdf/sitio-gandarias-elac3,final.pdf

Dieter Lehnhoff, "Orellana, Joaqun,Diccionario de la Msica Espaola e
Hispanoamericana, Ed. Emilio Casares Rodicio (Madrid: Sociedad General de
Autores y Editores, 1999-2000).

Paraskevadis Graciela, Las venas sonoras de Amrica Latina, en
http://www.gp-magma.net/pdf/txt_e/sitio-AL-Francia.pdf

Privado Cataln Mara Alejandra, Lo social en las fibras de la msica de
Joaqun Orellana, Guatemala, Editorial Cultura, 2010.

Roldan, Ingrid. Orellana y su marimba fantstica. [Entrevista a Joaqun
Orellana], revista D, N 19, Guatemala: Prensa Libre, 2004.


Multimedia

http://joaquinorellana.org/

Discography
Hojas de lbum. Joaqun Orellana. Obras par violn y piano.  Fondo  regional
de pequeos proyectos.

Humanofona,  incluida en el disco No. 2 de la Coleccin Msica Nueva
Latinoamericana,  Uruguay, 1976.

Ramajes de una marimba imaginaria, incluida en  Hacia una msica
contempornea latinoamericana, Costa Rica en 2003.



