Taylor & Francis – Encyclopedia of Modernism



About you

[Salutation]

Julian

[Middle name]

Hanna



[Enter your biography]



Madeira Interactive Technologies Institute



Your article

Jolas, Eugene (1894-1952)

[Enter any variant forms of your headword – OPTIONAL]

Eugene Jolas was a journalist, editor, translator, and poet who embodied the transatlantic character of modernism between the World Wars. The task of transition, the Paris-based literary journal he edited with his wife Maria Jolas and others between 1927 and 1938, was to translate European culture for Americans, and vice-versa. transition’s list of contributors reads like a who’s who of the international avant-garde. Jolas’ wealth of contacts in the literary world grew out of his previous job writing the column ‘Rambles Through Literary Paris’ for the Chicago Tribune Paris edition. The romantic, imagination-driven strain of modernism that Jolas promoted led to a close relationship with Expressionism and Surrealism. Publishing non-Anglophone experimental writing in translation or (after 1933) in the original language was a major focus of transition. Jolas also provided English translations of key European modernist texts outside the magazine, including Alfred Döblin’s Berlin Alexanderplatz (1931).

File: jolas1.jpg

Portrait of Eugene Jolas



Eugene Jolas was a journalist, editor, translator, and poet who embodied the transatlantic character of modernism between the World Wars. Born in New Jersey but raised in the borderland of Alsace-Lorraine by his French father and German mother, and moving frequently between Europe and America from 1909 until he settled in Paris in the 1920s, Jolas was a translator in every sense of the word. The task of transition, the Paris-based literary journal he edited with his wife Maria Jolas and others between 1927 and 1938, was to translate European culture for Americans, and vice-versa. (Bridge and Continents were among the other names he considered for the magazine.) transition’s list of contributors reads like a who’s who of the international avant-garde. Jolas’ wealth of contacts in the literary world grew out of his previous job writing the column ‘Rambles Through Literary Paris’ for the Chicago Tribune Paris edition. The romantic, imagination-driven strain of modernism that Jolas promoted led to a close relationship with Expressionism and Surrealism. Publishing non-Anglophone experimental writing in translation or (after 1933) in the original language was a major focus of transition. Jolas also provided English translations of key European modernist texts outside the magazine, including Alfred Döblin’s Berlin Alexanderplatz (1931).



Throughout the 1930s, Jolas promoted the search for a new literary language. His numerous books of poetry, including The Language of Night (1932), Angels and Demons (1937), and Vertical (1938), reflect this search for new modes of expression. In transition, this concern was summed up in the ‘Revolution of the Word’ manifesto of 1929. James Joyce’s Finnegans Wake (1939), serialized for more than a decade in the magazine as ‘Work in Progress’, also set the tone for linguistic experimentation. The Jolases were close friends and supporters of Joyce, contributing to the genesis of Finnegans Wake and later helping the author and his family escape from Paris to Switzerland in 1940. Following his death in 1941, Maria Jolas even acted for a time as Joyce’s executor. During the Second World War, Jolas served in the Psychological Warfare Division, and in the postwar period he led efforts to reestablish a free press in Germany. The Eugene and Maria Jolas Papers are held in the Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library of Yale University.

Further reading:

(Jolas)



(Jolas, Eugene Jolas: Critical Writings, 1924-1951)



(McMillan)



(Perloff)