
Conrad, Joseph (1857-1924)

SUMMARY
Joseph Conrad was one of the foremost British novelist of the Modernist
period. In fact, many of the narrative innovations he developed appeared a
decade or more before similar technical experimentation became the norm
among Modernist writers. Furthermore, his radical skepticism was a stark
contrast to the Edwardian optimism evident in the years prior to the First
World War and anticipates the disillusionment so many Modernist writers
felt during the post-war era.

MAIN ENTRY
      On December 3, 1857, Joseph Conrad was born Jzef Teodor Konrad
Korzeniowski in Berdyczw, a Polish region of Ukraine. His parents, Apollo
Korzeniowski (1820-1869) and Ewa Korzeniowska (ne Bobrowska, 1833-1865),
were Polish patriots during a time when Poland did not exist as an
autonomous nation. Having been conquered during the late 18th-century,
Poland was divided among Russia, Prussia, and Austria-Hungary. Conrads
family lived in the Russian- occupied segment of Polish territories, and
his parents resisted Russian rule. As a consequence, Apollo was arrested in
1861 and exiled with his family to Vologda, a remote part of Northern
Russia. While in exile, Conrads mother died of tuberculosis. His father
also contracted the disease and was allowed to return to Poland in 1868. He
died the following year. Conrad was then raised by his mothers family,
particularly his uncle Tadeusz Bobrowski (1829-1894), who treated Conrad
like a son and strongly influenced him.
      At fifteen, Conrad determined that he would be a sailor for his life
profession, and at seventeen Bobrowski allowed him to move to Marseilles,
France to train for the merchant marine service. Upon graduation at twenty-
one, he planned to join the French merchant marine service, only to
discover that he would require the permission of the Russian government,
which the government would not give. As a result, a few months shy of his
twenty-first birthday, he decided to join the British merchant marine
service, knowing no English. Conrad spent roughly the next twenty years
sailing around the globe, particularly in Southeast Asia, working his way
up from an ordinary deckhand eventually to captain of a sailing vessel.
This experience later served as the raw material for many of Conrads
writings.
      In 1889, while on vacation in London, Conrad made a decision that
forever altered his life: he began writing what would become his first
novel, Almayers Folly (1895). He spent roughly five years writing it in
between his work as a ships officer. During these five years, Conrad spent
a short spell working on a steamboat on the Congo River, an experience that
would forever alter him. He is reputed to have said years later, Before
the Congo I was just a mere animal. This experience would become the basis
for An Outpost of Progress (1897) and for his most famous work Heart of
Darkness (1899). Another life-changing experience occurred in 1893 with
his chance meeting of JOHN GALSWORTHY (1867-1933) while Conrad was serving
as First Mate aboard the Torrens and Galsworthy was a passenger aboard.
Ironically, neither seems to have known he would later become a well-known
author. This chance encounter resulted in a life-long friendship, Conrad
even naming his second son after Galsworthy.
      In 1894, Conrad completed the manuscript of Almayers Folly and sent
it to T. Fisher Unwin for consideration. One of the Unwins readers was
Edward Garnett (1868-1937), who recommended publication and later became a
friend and literary confidant of Conrads. Conrad seems not to have been
considering a change in professions, but with Garnetts encouragement and
maritime jobs scarce just then, Conrad fell into his second profession as a
writer. The publication of Almayers Folly would be indicative of Conrads
early literary career. The reviewers and literary world greatly appreciated
it, but the public was less enthusiastic. This pattern continued for nearly
twenty years, during which Conrad often struggled with writers block,
psychological depression, financial difficulties, and physical ailments.
Set in the Malay Archipelago, Almayers Folly was praised for its exotic
setting and its descriptive powers. An Outcast of the Island followed in
1896 and brings back some of the characters and environment from Almayers
Folly, but set at an earlier time. It was also around this time that he
married Jesse George (1873-1936). It was in 1897, however, that Conrad
produced his first work to which the term masterpiece began to be
affixed. This novel, The Nigger of the Narcissus, caused fellow literary
figures such as Stephen Crane (1871-1900) and Henry James (1843-1916) to
take notice, and it was during this time that Conrad made several important
literary friendships with such authors as Crane, James, H. G. WELLS (1866-
1946), ARNOLD BENNETT (1867-1931), and, most important, FORD MADOX FORD
(1873-1939), who collaborated with Conrad and appears to have helped Conrad
develop some of his narrative techniques.
      The publication of The Nigger of the Narcissus ushered in a
particularly productive fifteen-year period during which many commentators
feel Conrad produced his finest work. Conrads first collection of stories,
Tales of Unrest, followed in 1898, and in 1899 and 1900 Conrad produced two
his most highly-regarded works: Heart of Darkness and Lord Jim. While
occasional narrative innovations had appeared in his previous work, these
tales established experimental techniques that would influence the
direction of Modernist literary form. In Lord Jim in particular Conrad
introduces multiple narrators, whose personal perspective influences how
phenomena appears, and he presents events unfolding not in the sequence of
their occurrence but in the sequence of the narrators thoughts. These
tales also establish Conrads emphasis on his characters psychological
struggles to find meaning in a seemingly meaningless universe.
      Conrad followed Lord Jim with a political satire, The Inheritors
(1901), written in collaboration with Ford Madox Ford. The novel was not
the popular success the authors hoped for, but Conrad solidified his
reputation with the publication of two collections of stories: Youth and
Two Other Stories (1902) and Typhoon and Other Stories (1903). By this
point in his career, Conrad was viewed as a major literary figure, and the
term genius began to appear frequently in reviews of these collections.
Later in 1903, another collaboration with Ford, Romance, was published.
Although the novel found more favor among the reviewers than their previous
effort, once again it was not the popular success the authors sought.
Nostromo, Conrads most ambitious novel and one many consider to be
Conrads best work, appeared in 1904. The novels sheer panoramic scope
alone remarkable, as Conrad creates a fictitious South American country,
complete with history, society, and politics while investigating
revolutionary politics, global capitalism, and economic imperialism.
Despite its place in Conrads canon, Nostromo met a mixed response.
Conrads longest and most challenging novel, many readers found it simply
too difficult to appreciate. In 1906, Conrad published his first book of
memoirs, The Mirror of the Sea, and unlike Nostromo this book was warmly
welcomed for its direct narrative and lyric descriptions. Conrads next
novel, The Secret Agent (1907), is not only one of Conrads best novels, it
may well be his most perfectly controlled work. The narrative is permeated
by irony, and Conrads profound skepticism toward political systems comes
to the fore. Another collection of stories, A Set of Six, appeared the next
year. Unlike Conrads earlier collections, the literary quality of these
stories is typically thought to be more uneven. Much of the next few years
was spent writing Conrads last political novel, Under Western Eyes (1911).
In some ways, this novel is the culmination of Conrads literary efforts.
To an even greater degree, Conrads skepticism toward political systems
becomes apparent, he rejects both the established government and its
revolutionary opponents, showing how both sides lose track of individuals,
who are invariably crushed between the opposing political forces. Under
Western Eyes also continues Conrads investigations into the complicated
issues of moral behavior and the psychological struggles of humanity in a
modern world where absolute truths appear to be absent.
      Conrad often experienced a minor bought of exhaustion after
completing a major project, but Under Western Eyes was different. This
time, he suffered a complete collapse. Whether because of the extensive
time it took to complete the book, the lengthy immersion into things
Russian, the constant financial pressure he felt, or all of these, Conrad
remained ill for nearly six months. A letter by Conrads wife talks of
Conrad allowing no one to touch the manuscript, and of carrying on
conversations with the novels characters.
      After the publication of Under Western Eyes, Conrads works changed.
Some have seen this as an abrupt decline in his literary abilities. Others
have seen it as a shift in artistic direction, but whatever the case
Conrads works after this novel (with only a few exceptions) are different
in both plot and emphasis. His next work, A Personal Record (1912), was an
autobiographical memoir that sought to explain how Conrad became a sailor
and how he became a writer. Unlike most memoirs, its narrative structure is
not straightforward, nor does the volume revealing much of its author.
      Conrads next fictional work was the collection Twixt Land and Sea
(1912). This volume contained perhaps Conrads final masterpiece, the story
The Secret Sharer (1910), written while he was finishing Under Western
Eyes. The other two stories are more like the work of the later Conrad,
with their emphasis on chance and romantic relationships. The collection
was a modest popular success and was followed by Conrads Chance (1914),
Conrads first truly popular work. The novel is noted for its narrative
intricacy and for its romance between Flora de Barral and Captain Anthony.
      With the publication of Chance, Conrad finally achieved financial
independence, but his works no longer tend to emphasize the plight of
humanity in the face of an indifferent universe and the importance for
Conrad of confronting such an existence and attempting to create meaning in
full knowledge that all meaning could only be contingent. Instead, Chance
reflects an emphasis on a universe controlled by chance happenings and
seems to shift greater value onto romantic relationships than he had
previously. Conrad had always expressed value in human relationships, but
in his earlier work less emphasis lay on the relationships themselves than
on their role in humanitys struggle in a meaningless universe.
      The following year, Conrad published Victory and the collection
Within the Tides. Both were successful, and Victory is often considered to
be among Conrads best works of this period, as it focuses on rejecting
nihilistic skepticism and embracing the necessity of connecting with
others. On the other hand, Within the Tides is often seen as Conrads
weakest collection.
      Presumably because of his response to the First World War, or perhaps
for some other reason, Conrads work of 1917 was unusual for this period.
The Tale, The Warriors Soul, and The Shadow-Line all present
characters confronting the problem of moral and psychological dilemmas that
so often marked his earlier career.
      Rather than continuing this trend, Conrads next work, The Arrow of
Gold (1919), picks up the direction initiated by Chance. The novel harks
back to Conrads time in France training for the merchant marine service
and deals with the romance between a young protagonist (seemingly modeled
after a young Conrad) and an alluring woman, set in the context of gun-
running during the Carlist attempt to seize the Spanish throne.
      Some twenty years after he began writing it, Conrad finally completed
The Rescue in 1920, which takes up the earlier period of events appearing
in Almayers Folly and An Outcast of the Islands, although with far greater
emphasis on romantic relationships.
      For some years, Conrad had contributed reviews and essays to
periodicals. Many of these were collected in Notes on Life and Letters
(1921). Also during this time, Conrad was at work on a novel set in
Napoleonic France. He never completed this novel, Suspense (1925), which
was published unfinished after Conrads death. However, while breaking off
from Suspense, Conrad was able to finish a related novel, The Rover (1923).
Again set in Napoleonic France, The Rover considers such issues as self-
sacrifice, romantic love, and patriotism.
      Also during this period, Conrad wrote two plays, The Secret Agent
(1922) and Laughing Anne (1923), both based on prior fictional works. He
had done the same thing with One Day More (1905) some years earlier. None
of these were successful productions.
      For some time, Conrad had felt that he was coming to the end of his
days, and on August 3, 1924. Conrad suffered a heart attack and died. A
final collection of stories, Tales of Hearsay (1925), appeared shortly
thereafter, and, along with Suspense, a collection of essays and other
similar writings were published as Last Essays (1926).
List of Works
Novels
Almayers Folly (1895)
An Outcast of the Islands (1896)
The Nigger of the Narcissus (1897)
Lord Jim (1900)
The Inheritors (1901) with Ford Madox Ford
Romance (1903) with Ford Madox Ford
Nostromo (1904)
The Secret Agent (1907)
Under Western Eyes (1911)
Chance (1914)
Victory (1915)
The Shadow-Line (1917)
The Arrow of Gold (1919)
The Rescue (1920)
The Rover (1923)
The Nature of a Crime (1924) with Ford Madox Ford
Suspense (1925) Unfinished
Short Story Collections
Tales of Unrest (1898)
Youth and Two Other Stories (1902)
Typhoon and Other Stories (1903)
A Set of Six (1908)
Twixt Land and Sea (1912)
Within the Tides (1915)
Tales of Hearsay (1925)
Memoirs
The Mirror of the Sea (1906)
A Personal Record (1912)
Drama
The Secret Agent (1923)
Laughing Anne and One Day More (1924)
Essays
Notes on Life and Letters (1921)
Last Essays (1926)
Letters
The Collected Letters of Joseph Conrad (1983-2007)
Further Reading
Baines, Jocelyn (1959), Joseph Conrad: A Critical Biography, London:
Weidenfeld and Nicolson.
Batchelor, John (1994), The Life of Joseph Conrad: A Critical Biography,
Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Karl, Frederick R. (1979), Joseph Conrad: The Three Lives, New York:
Farrar, Straus and Giroux.
Meyers, Jeffrey (1991), Joseph Conrad: A Biography, London: John Murray.
Najder, Zdzisaw (2007), Joseph Conrad: A Life, Trans. Halina Najder,
Rochester, NY: Camden House.
Stape, John (2007). The Several Lives of Joseph Conrad, London: William
Heinemann.
Tennant, Roger (1981). Joseph Conrad, New York: Atheneum.

John G. Peters, University of North Texas
