
Wassily Kandinsky (1866-1944)

Kandinskys commitment to abstraction in painting and theory has attracted
the attention of artists and critics throughout the twentieth century.  His
major manifesto ber des Geistige in der Kunst (On the Spiritual in Art)
(fig.1), which described abstraction as a stimulus to a new world order,
went through three editions by March of 1912. This publication as well as
the establishment with the painter FRANZ MARC of the exhibition group and
yearbook Der Blaue Reiter in 1911, insured the fame of his large-sized and
vividly colored oils, some bearing titles such as Composition (fig. 2) and
Improvisation to emphasize the relation of painting with music, then
thought to be the least representational and thus the most ideal of all the
arts.

      Like other artists and writers of his generation who had absorbed
Symbolist, theosophical, and anarchist beliefs, Kandinsky felt that he had
to engage his audience in a struggle to understand his painting in order to
lead them to a greater awareness of the cosmic orders.  Naturalism was too
descriptive of the physical world, but in 1912 he did not believe his
audience, and even others artists, were ready for abstraction.  Instead
from 1909 onward, he chose to dematerialize biblically resonant images and
to give apocalyptic or paradisiacal titles and subtitles such as Last
Judgment or Garden of Love to his major works.  The process through which
he veiled these images is readily seen when comparing a preparatory study
(fig.3) to the final oil (fig.4).  Kandinsky thought these hidden images or
constructions, along with contrasting lines and colours, could engage the
spectator to not only stop but also to linger, even to mediate upon the
work itself.  If both content and form were too readable, the painting
would not reflect the confusion and dichotomies of that time.  By the end
of 1913, he had come to believe that cosmic space, representing his vision
of Paradise, could be the subject of the entire painting.  Flatness had
been a first step away from nature, and he wrote about his next phase of
using colors and lines to move flowingly forward and backward to create
what he called the painterly expansion of space.  His concept of creating
infinite vistas within his canvases coincided with a burgeoning
fascination among other critics and artists such as GUILLAUME APOLLONAIRE
and KAZIMIR MALEVICH with the notion of the FOURTH DIMENSION as a metaphor
for a new elevated consciousness that would lead humans to utopia.

      The Moscow-born Kandinsky moved to Munich in 1896 to study painting.
But he never lost contact with his Russian heritage and returned there
during the First World War.  He became a supporter of the cultural aims of
the new Soviet Union, serving on committees for the reform of art education
and briefly chairing the Moscow Institute of Artistic Culture.  As painting
came under criticism as elitist by the CONSTRUCTIVISTS, Kandinsky returned
to Germany, and in 1922 WALTER GROPIUS appointed him to the faculty of
Weimars most famous art school, the BAUHAUS.  He remained with the Bauhaus
as it moved from Weimar to Dessau and finally to Berlin.  Shortly after the
Nazis closed the school in 1933, Kandinsky immigrated to Paris, where he
spent the last years of his life.  Whether using amorphous colours and
shapes of his pre-World War I years, or in the twenties precise geometric
structures as in Several Circles (fig. 5), or biomorphic forms during the
thirties and early forties, Kandinsky continued to have faith in the
utopian notion of a universal language of form and colour communicating
transnational and transcendental truths.



References and further Reading

Barnett, V. E. (2006-7) Kandinsky Drawings: Catalogue Raisonn, Volume One,
Individual Drawings; Volume Two, Sketchbooks, London: Phillip Wilson.

Barnett, V. E. (1992-4) Kandinsky Watercolours:  Catalogue Raisonn, Volume
One, 1900-1921; Volume Two, 1922-44, Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press,
1994.

Hoberg, A. (ed.). (1994) Wassily Kandinsky and Gabriele Mnter, Letters and
Reminiscences, 1902-1914, New York: Prestel-Verlag.

Friedel, H. (ed.) (2007) Gesammelte Schriften 1889-1916. Farbensprache,
Kompositionslehre und andere unverffentlichte Texte, Munich: Prestel-
Verlag.

Lindsay, K. C., and P. Vergo (eds.) (1982) Kandinsky: Complete Writing on
Art, Boston: G.K. Hall.

Long, R-C. W. (1980) Kandinsky: the Development of an Abstract Style,
Oxford: Clarendon Press.

Roethel, H. K., and J. K. Benjamin. (1982-4) Kandinsky: Catalogue Raisonn
of the Oil Paintings, Volume One, 1900-1915; Volume Two, 1916-1944, Ithaca,
NY: Cornell University Press.

Wnsche, I. (ed) (2006) Galka E. Scheyer und Die Blaue Vier, Briefwechsel
1924-1945, Wobern, Bern: Benteli.

Zimmermann, R. (2002) Die Kunsttheorie von Wassily Kandinsky, 2 vol.,
Berlin: Gebr. Mann Verlag.



Paratextual Material



Fig. 1. Wassily Kandinsky, Cover of ber das Geistige in der Kunst, 3rd.ed.
1912, woodcut.

[pic]

Fig. 2. Wassily Kandinsky, Composition V, 1911, oil on canvas, Neue Galerie
New York. [pic]



Fig. 3. Wassily Kandinsky, study for Improvisation 27 (Garden of Love II),
1911-12, watercolour, Gabriele Mnter Stiftung, Stdtische Galerie im
Lenbachhaus, Munich. [pic]



Fig. 4. Wassily Kandinsky, Improvisation 27(Garden of Love II), 1912, oil
on canvas, Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York[pic]



Fig. 5. Wassily Kandinsky, Several Circles, 1926, oil on canvas, Solomon R.
Guggenheim Museum, New York

[pic]



