
Anger, Kenneth (1927- )

Sofie Verdoodt (Gent University)

Kenneth Wilbur Anglemyer, known as Kenneth Anger, was brought up in Santa
Monica in Southern California. He is one of the most influential directors
of the American post-war avant-garde. Anger claims to have found his way to
the cinema as a child actor in Max Reinhardts film of A Midsummer Nights
Dream (1935). After living in France in the early 1950s, he returned to
America and became a key figure in San Franciscos bohemian art community.
Both fascinated and repelled by Hollywood, he would become a thorn on the
side of the film industry. His book Hollywood Babylon was at once
criticized and celebrated for dealing with scandalous and morbid
microhistories of film celebrities and failing stars. A cult icon for
occultists and queer subculture followers, he is also recognized as one of
the most influential experimental filmmakers alive. His oeuvre consists of
short films often described as mythopoetic due to the mixture of lyrical
imagery, ritualistic montage, mythical subjects and psychodramatic
narratives. In the trance-like, homoerotic Fireworks (1947), he adds a
campy twist to the dreamlike film poetics of the 1940s avant-garde.

For Anger, film practice should be the audiovisual equivalent of a
spiritual ceremony. An adept of the occultist Aleister Crowley, who
preached individual power and the release of creative impulses through
magic and sexual rites, his work contains elements of paganism, the
Dionysian, and the archetypical. His Magick Lantern Cycle, consisting of
nine films made between 1947 and 1980, testifies to his obscure
affiliations. Ritual is not the frequent subject of his films but
characterizes as well the experience of film viewing. Besides the motives
of incantation and transformation, Anger also treats sociological themes,
presenting ambivalent sexuality as a counter-force against oppressive forms
of representation. He dismantles and subverts mainstream stereotypes by an
amalgam of postmodern, cross-referential strategies, which include frequent
resort to pop music, saturated colors, extremely stylized framing and
camera movements, and de-familiarized mass icons such as Mickey Mouse or
bikers. Humor and violence often go hand in hand in films such as Scorpio
Rising (1963), probably his best known work, which synchronizes a playful
mosaic of pop songs to a disturbingly fetishistic ode to the motorcyclist
esthetic and lifestyle. The production of the occult-psychedelic Lucifer
Rising (1970-1980), last part of the Magick Lantern Cycle, was troubled by
conflicts with musician Bobby Beausoleil (eventually imprisoned for his
involvement in Manson Family murders). After this chaotic creation, Anger
released some minor works and kept silent for almost twenty years. In the
years 2000 he made a comeback with several exhibitions and new short films
in which he occasionally performs, adding a new level of self-reflection to
his mythographic career. A recent accomplishment is his Technicolor Skull
performance (2011) for images and sound, with Anger playing the theremin,
and released as a recording on red vinyl.

References and further reading

Brook, V. (2006) Puce Modern Moment: Camp, Postmodernism and the Films of
Kenneth Anger, Journal of Film and Video 58 (4): 3-15.

Hunter, J. (ed.) (2001) Moonchild: The Films of Kenneth Anger, London:
Creation Books.

Hutchison, A.L. (2011) Kenneth Anger, London: Black Dog Publishing (2nd
revised edition).

Sitney, P. A. (1979) Magus, Visionary Film: The American Avant-Garde. New
York: Oxford University Press, pp. 114-125.

Suarez, J.A. (1996) Bike Boys, Drag Queens & Superstars: Avant-garde, Mass
Culture, and Gay Identities in the 1960s Underground Cinema, Bloomington:
Indiana University Press.


