KIM, Soo-yong/KIM, Su-yong (September 23, 1929--  )



Trained as a filmmaker during the Korean War, Kim Soo-yong debuted in 1958 amid the South Korean film industry’s postwar recovery and became one of the representative Korean filmmakers of the 1960s.  Under the film policies of Park Chung-hee’s military government, the film industry suffered from censorship and quotas.  The literary film emerged as an important genre signifying quality and artistic merit.  Kim’s 1965 Kaenmaŭl (Seaside Village) marked him as a leading director of literary adaptations, which account for half his prolific oeuvre of over one hundred films.  Kim also worked in popular genres, including comedy, melodrama, youth films, and anti-communist films, but is remembered for films that display realist, non-paternalistic perspectives on postwar society.  His 1963 film Hyŏlmaek (Kinship) depicted the generational divide among North Korean defectors living in poverty on the fringes of society in the industrializing South.  Seaside Village provocatively took on the sexuality of widows in a fishing community and contained lesbian innuendo.  Several of his films also demonstrated a formal modernism.  The 1967 An'gae (Mist), regarded as one of his highest achievements, employs experimental montage and a temporally complex flashback structure.  In later years, he has been credited with helping ease film censorship in South Korea. 





Selected Works:



A Henpecked Husband (Kongchŏga, 1958)



Kinship (Hyŏlmaek, 1963)



The Seaside Village (Kaenmaŭl, 1965)



Mist (An'gae, 1967)



Night Journey (Yahaeng, 1977)





Further reading:



Cho, Y.; Kim, Y.; Park, J. (eds.) (2002) Kim Soo-Yong: An Aesthete Bridging Tradition and Modernism. Pusan: Pusan International Film Festival.



Mun, Gwan-gyu (2009) Korean Film Directors: Lee Man-hee. Seoul: Seoul Selection.



Park, Seung Hyun (2007) “Korean Cinema after Liberation: Production, Industry, and Regulatory Trends” in Gateward, Frances (ed.) Seoul Searching: Culture and Identity in Contemporary Korean Cinema. Albany: State University of New York Press.

Paratextual material:



Korean Film Archive You Tube Channel, Kim Soo-yong Playlist:

https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL28d5JImIlH4Jn7PZuP2qWTenpbEVpsHr



Ryan Cook

Harvard University