
Klee, Paul (1879-1940)

Paul Klee was one of the most important and inventive figures in the
development of modernism in the visual arts. The Swiss-German artist's
unusual oeuvre drew on the work of other modernist painters while also
challenging foundational tenets of modernism in painting.

The son of a music teacher, Klee was a talented violinist. As an adolescent
growing up in Berne, Switzerland, Klee was interested not only in the
visual arts but also in poetry and music. After graduating from the Berne
Gymnasium in 1898, Klee moved to Munich to study art at the academy.

In 1906, Klee married the pianist Lily Stumpf; their only child was born
the next year. Relatively isolated from AVANT-GARDE art, Klee undertook a
prolonged artistic self-education, attempting to break down pictorial art
into its elementsline, tone, colorand master them one by one.

In 1911 and 1912, Klee became friendly with the artists of DER BLAUE
REITER, including VASSILY KANDINSKY, FRANZ MARC, and August Macke, who
accompanied Klee on a trip to Tunisia in 1914. Through these new
connections, Klee became familiar with a broad spectrum of modernist art.
In 1916, Klee, a German citizen, was drafted; he served as a clerk in
Bavaria, far from the front. During the war, the Berlin dealer Herwarth
Walden energetically promoted Klee's work. By 1920, many in the German
AVANT-GARDE acknowledged Klee as a major artist, and Walter Gropius invited
him to join the faculty of the newly established BAUHAUS.

Klee taught at the BAUHAUS until 1931, when he took a position at the
Dsseldorf academy. When the Nazis took power, the academy suspended Klee,
who moved back to Switzerland. In the mid-1930s, Klee began to suffer from
scleroderma. Despite this debilitating disease, the last years of his life
in exile were highly productive.

Most of Klee's oeuvre consists of intimate, small-scale drawings (a medium
especially important for Klee), watercolors, and oils. Often his works
involve unusual combinations of media and unusual supports, resulting in
layered, complex surfaces that invite close examination [Insert illus.
here: Carpet of Memory]. His play with materials and procedures is one of
the most distinctive aspects of his art.

Klee's art is distinguished as well by his abiding fascination with making
works that trouble the opposition between the visual and the verbal. Many
of his works play with writing as a visual phenomenon [Insert illus. here:
Villa R]. Closely related is Klee's interest in all sorts of notational
systems and in visual signs that signify by convention rather than by
resemblance (such as the hearts and stars that often appear in his art).
Klee's art works against any strict divide between the visual and the
verbal on another level as well, in the way his works often suggest
fragmentary narratives [Insert illus. here: Concentrated Novel].

Klee's interest in narrative may be connected to his insistence that his
works demonstrate how they are, as he wrote, made not at one stroke but
rather constructed bit by bit, just like a house, and that likewise the
viewing of his pictures must take time. In his writing, teaching, and art,
Klee argued against the traditional distinction between the spatial visual
arts and the temporal arts of poetry and music. This set him apart from
many of his fellow pioneers of modernist ABSTRACT ART.

Klee's art and writings have fascinated critics and philosophers from
Walter Benjamin and Carl Einstein to Martin Heidegger to Michel Foucault
and Gilles Deleuze. His complex and diverse body of work has influenced
artists as unlike one another as Kurt Schwitters, JOAN MIR, and Kenneth
Noland, as well as composers, including Pierre Boulez, Gunther Schuller,
and Sndor Veress.

References and further reading:

Franciscono, Marcel. Paul Klee: His Work and Thought. Chicago: University
of Chicago, 1991.

Glaesemer, Jrgen. Paul Klee: Die farbigen Werke im Kunstmuseum Bern. Bern:
Kornfeld, 1976.

Greenberg, Clement. "An Essay on Paul Klee." Collected Essays and
Criticism, vol. 3. Edited by John O'Brian. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1986, 3-13.

Paul Klee. Edited by Carolyn Lanchner. New York: Museum of Modern Art,
1987.

Paul Klee: Kunst und Karriere: Beitrge des internationalen Symposiums in
Bern. Edited by Oskar Btschmann and Josef Helfenstein. Bern: Stmpfli
Verlag, 2000.

Werckmeister, O. K. The Making of Paul Klee's Career, 1914-1920. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1989.

[pic]
Paul Klee, Carpet of Memory, 1914-1922

[pic]
Paul Klee, Villa R, 1919

[pic]
Paul Klee, Concentrated Novel, 1916

