
Kliun, Ivan Vasilievich [b. Kliunkov]
Born ?? 1873 in Bolshiye Gorki, Vladimir Province, Imperial Russia
Died 13 December, 1943, Moscow, USSR

In attending the Fedor Rerberg Art Institute between 1903 and 1908, Ivan
Kliun not only learned the laws of colour and light from a Russian
Impressionist, he also met Kazimir Malevich, David Burliuk, Aleksei
Morgunov and others. Together they were at the core of Russian avant-garde
painters in Moscow. As with so many artists at the time, Kliun seems to
have made a sudden leap into a combination of Cubism and Futurism in 1913.
His works of 1914 are highly complex constructions in which a portrait
head, a machine, or the turning wheels of a locomotive become decomposed
Cubistically in order to reveal the repetitive sections of dynamic Futurist
movement. It was also in 1914 that Kliun began an in-depth investigation
into colour and this is the source of his non-objective painting from then
on. Sharing ideas with Malevich, Kliuns first Suprematist works were
sculptures (1915), but from that year until the early 1930s his paintings
were composed mainly with beams of light projected onto a screen. This
painting of light was based on the laws of spectral, prismatic colours and
organised by various geometrical structures. The works were non-objective
and Kliuns Suprematist enquiry into light was in the main stream of
modernism since Impressionism.

Kliuns earliest dated drawings and watercolours between 1900 and 1909
depict landscapes and still lifes, but from 1910 there are numerous
Symbolist compositions influenced in particular by the work of Mikhail
Vrubel. In his Cubo-Futurism Kliun was unique in the way he worked in two
media  oil on canvas and a three-dimensional object made in wood  in the
exploration of an object from multiple points of view (Cubism) and the
dynamism inherent in these multiple points of view or, indeed, of objects
that move such as a train (Futurism). An example of this cross-over between
painting and wood constructions can be seen in Landscape Passing By (1914,
former George Costakis Collection, Moscow), which exists in numerous
versions and in several media. These works of 1914 are evidence of an
investigation into dynamism through rhythmic structure expressed in planar
shapes. That Kliun used projectors is confirmed in a text of the late
1920s, Colour, Light, Sweetness..., in which he writes: If I shine
another light through another opening in the wall onto a screen, then
depending on the position and adjusting of the lens, a light composition
begins to appear.

[pic]
Suprematism, c. 1922. Oil on canvas, 61 x 43.5 cm. Private Collection

These light compositions varied between a single geometrical plane of
colour (square, circle, rectangle, etc.) and complex arrangements of
interpenetrating geometrical planes, from a dense colour to a limpid
transparency. His colours obeyed the laws of spectral colours, while the
complementary colours of light  red/green, orange/blue, yellow/violet 
served to animate the works because they animate the observers eye. Due to
Stalins 1932 decree making art an instrument of propaganda, Kliun returned
to the realism of the portrait and the landscape. Yet among his last works
is a colour chart dated 1942: Regarding the Problem of Composition:
Construction following Decorative and Organic Principals. Kliun remained a
colourist, and in his Suprematism, form manifests through light.

References and further reading:
The George Costakis Collection  Russian Avant-Garde Art, New York: Harry
N. Abrams,
      Inc., 1981, pp. 139-205.
Svetlana Kliundova-Soloveichik, Ivan Vasilievich Kliun. New York: IVK Art,
1994.
Light and Colour in the Russian Avant-Garde, Thessaloniki: The Costakis
Collection from
      the State Museum of Contemporary Art, 2004.

