Taylor & Francis – Encyclopedia of Modernism



About you

[Salutation]

Natalja

[Middle name]

Chestopalova



[Enter your biography]



Ryerson University



Your article

Klossowski, Pierre (1905-2001)

[Enter any variant forms of your headword – OPTIONAL]

French philosopher, writer, artist and translator Pierre Klossowski was born in Paris and raised in Switzerland, Germany and France. His education was influenced by Rainer Maria Rilke and André Gide. A friend of Georges Bataille, Walter Benjamin and poet Pierre-Jean Jouve (1887-1976), Klossowski produced French translations of works by Friedrich Nietzsche, Franz Kafka, Martin Heidegger and Ludwig Wittgenstein from German, and the works of Suetonius, Virgil, Augustine and Tertullian from Latin.

French philosopher, writer, artist and translator Pierre Klossowski was born in Paris and raised in Switzerland, Germany and France. His education was influenced by Rainer Maria Rilke and André Gide. A friend of Georges Bataille, Walter Benjamin and poet Pierre-Jean Jouve (1887-1976), Klossowski produced French translations of works by Friedrich Nietzsche, Franz Kafka, Martin Heidegger and Ludwig Wittgenstein from German, and the works of Suetonius, Virgil, Augustine and Tertullian from Latin. His most influential literary-philosophical works were published after World War II and included essays on the Marquis de Sade and Nietzsche as well as six novels, including Le Baphomet (1965), which won the prestigious Prix des Critiques in 1965. Published in 1947, Klossowski’s original psychoanalytic interpretation of Sade in Sade Mon Prochain (Sade My Neighbor) incorporates biographical detail and medical and psychosexual analysis of Sade’s life with figures of law and transgression in writing. Through his translations of Nietzsche, Klossowski has been a major influence on Gilles Deleuze, Michel Foucault, Jean-François Lyotard and, arguably, Jacques Derrida. Published in 1969, Nietzsche et le Cercle Vicieus (Nietzsche and the Vicious Circle), a key text in Nietzsche scholarship, is a comprehensive examination of the doctrine of the eternal return and the emphasis Nietzsche gave to the motifs of parody and simulacrum. His most influential literary-philosophical works were published after World War II and included essays on the Marquis de Sade and Nietzsche as well as six novels, including Le Baphomet (1965), which won the prestigious Prix des Critiques in 1965. Published in 1947, Klossowski’s original psychoanalytic interpretation of Sade in Sade Mon Prochain (Sade My Neighbor) incorporates biographical detail and medical and psychosexual analysis of Sade’s life with figures of law and transgression in writing. Through his translations of Nietzsche, Klossowski has been a major influence on Gilles Deleuze, Michel Foucault, Jean-François Lyotard and, arguably, Jacques Derrida. Published in 1969, Nietzsche et le Cercle Vicieus (Nietzsche and the Vicious Circle), a key text in Nietzsche scholarship, is a comprehensive examination of the doctrine of the eternal return and the emphasis Nietzsche gave to the motifs of parody and simulacrum.



List of Works

(1950) La vocation suspendue, Paris: Gallimard, repr. 1990.

(1969) Nietzsche et le cercle vicieux, trans. D. W. Smith as Nietzsche and the Vicious Circle, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1997.

(1965) Les lois de l’hospitalité, Paris: Gallimard.

(1965) Le Baphomet, trans. S. Hawkes and S. Sartarelli, New York: Marsilio, 1992

(1967) Sade Mon Prochain, trans. A. Lingis as Sade My Neighbor, Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 1991.

with Blanchot M. (2002) Decadence of the Nude/La décadence du nu, London: Black Dog Publications.

Further reading:

(Filipovic)

(Hill)

(Hanshe)

(Pierre Klossowski)