
Kolisch, Rudolf (1896-1978)
Daniel Bangert

Rudolf Kolisch was an Austrian-born violinist, teacher and conductor. As
leader of the Kolisch Quartet he premiered many important chamber works by
the Second Viennese School and other modernist composers of the first half
of the twentieth century. He later became leader of the Pro Arte Quartet
and taught at the University of Wisconsin in Madison and at the New England
Conservatory in Boston.


Kolisch was born in Klamm am Semmering, Austria on July 20, 1896. His
father Rudolf was a doctor and his mother Henriette, a pianist. Soon after
starting violin lessons, an injury to his left hand led him to hold the
violin in his right hand and bow left-handed. He attended the Vienna Music
Academy and the University of Vienna, but his postgraduate studies were
interrupted by three years of service in the Austrian army during World War
I. His teachers included the Czech violinist Otakar evk, the composer
Franz Schrecker, and the musicologist Guido Adler.

In 1919 he became a composition student of Arnold Schoenberg (who would
later marry Kolischs sister Gertrud), but soon became involved in
Schoenbergs Verein fr musikalische Privatauffhrungen (Society for
Private Musical Performances) as a performer. At Schoenbergs urging,
Kolisch formed the Vienna String Quartet in 1922. After several changes in
personnel, its membership stabilised with Kolisch and Felix Khuner on
violin, violist Eugene Lehner, and cellist Benar Heifetz. From 1928 the
group was known as the Kolisch Quartet.

                                    [pic]

Kolisch Quartet (from left): Felix Khuner, Eugene Lehner, Benar Heifetz,
Rudolf Kolisch

Note: [Image above taken from
http://satyr78lp.blogspot.com.au/2012/03/kolisch-string-quartet-mozart-kv-
575.html - a widely used photo for CDs etc. (copyright unclear). Other
images that could be used in the entry include those in the Tully Potter
Collection, such as http://www.tullypottercollection.com/browse-all-
products.html?page=shop.product_details&flypage=flypage.tpl&product_id=2198&
category_id=1&keyword=kolisch]

The Kolisch Quartet toured widely in Europe, but their access to some
countries was restricted after Hitlers rise due to their association with
modern composers. From 1935 they performed in the USA regularly and decided
to remain there. Heifetz and Lehner left the quartet in 1939 to take up
orchestral positions and after continuing for a few years with other
players, the Kolisch Quartet was permanently disbanded in 1944.

While they also played the standard quartet repertoire, the Kolisch Quartet
were best known as advocates for new music. They worked closely with
several composers, particularly Schoenberg, whose Fourth Quartet bears a
joint dedication to Elizabeth Sprague Coolidge who commissioned the piece
and to the ideal interpreters of it the Kolisch Quartet. Compositions
premiered by the group include Schoenbergs Third and Fourth Quartets and
his Concerto for String Quartet and Orchestra, Bergs Lyric Suite, Weberns
String Trio and String Quartet, Bartks Fifth and Sixth Quartets, Kreneks
Fifth Quartet, and Sessions Second Quartet. The Kolisch Quartets custom
of rehearsing from scores and performing from memory were notable
innovations in quartet playing.

Kolisch taught courses on musical performance and chamber music at the New
School for Social Research in New York City from 1939 to 1941, where he
also conducted the first American performances of Stravinskys The
Soldiers Tale, Bartks Music for Strings, Percussion and Celesta, and
Schoenbergs Chamber Symphony. From 1944 to 1967 Kolisch taught at the
University of Wisconsin in Madison and led the Pro Arte Quartet (the first
quartet-in-residence in a major American university). In the 1950s he
taught at the Internationale Ferienkurse fr Neue Musik (International
Summer Courses in New Music) in Darmstadt, Germany. Kolischs last post was
at the New England Conservatory in Boston where he was a faculty member
from 1967 until his death in Watertown, Massachusetts on August 1, 1978.

References and further reading

Harp, D. (1988) Recalling the Kolisch String Quartet, Chamber Music 5
(1), 19-21, 40-45. (An interview with Kolisch Quartet violist Eugene
Lehner.)

Kolisch, R. (1943) Tempo and Character in Beethovens Music, The Musical
Quarterly 29 (2-3): 169-187, 291-312. (Originally presented in 1942 at a
meeting of the American Musicological Society, Kolischs paper was an
important contribution to the debate on Beethovens tempi and metronome
marks.)

Mell, A. (1977-78) In Memoriam: Rudolf Kolisch (1896-1978), Journal of
the Violin Society of America 4 (1), 142-46. (A brief reflection on
Kolischs career.)

Potter, T. (2003) Twelve-tone Memories: A History of the Kolisch Quartet,
In Honor of Rudolf Kolisch [liner notes]. Berkeley, CA: Music & Arts.
(Notes to accompany recordings of the Kolisch Quartet performing the
complete Schoenberg Quartets and other works by Bartk, Berg, Webern and
Schubert, plus solo recordings by Kolisch of Schoenbergs Violin Concerto
and Bartks Sonata for Solo Violin.)

Shreffler, A. C. & Trippett, D. (eds.) (2009) Rudolf Kolisch in America 
Aufstze und Dokumente, Musiktheorie: Zeitschrift fr Musikwissenschaft 24
(3). (Articles and documents, including lectures given by Kolisch on
performance, Beethoven quartets, contemporary music, and Schoenberg. Also
included is a speech by Theodor W. Adorno for Kolischs sixtieth birthday
and the script for a radio dialogue between Kolisch and Adorno.)

Grassl, M. & Kapp, R. (eds.) (2002) Die Lehre von der musikalischen
Auffhrung in der Wiener Schule. Vienna: Bhlau. (Includes chapters on
Kolisch by Pro Arte Quartet cellist Lowell Creitz, Kolischs student and
teaching assistant at the New England Conservatory David Satz, and Susanna
Watling.)
