
Routledge Encyclopaedia of Modernism Entries

Dr Dorothy Price, University of Bristol, UK

Kollwitz, Kthe (1867-1945)


Kthe Kollwitz (ne Schmidt) was born in Knigsberg, East Prussia in 1867,
the fifth child of Karl and Katharina Schmidt.  In 1884 she entered the
drawing and painting school of the Association of Women Artists in Berlin
and then the Womens School of Art in Munich. In Berlin she trained under
Karl Stauffer-Bern who introduced her to the work of Max Klinger. Klingers
1891 treatise Malerei und Zeichnung was crucial to Kollwitzs early
decision to abandon painting in favour of the graphic arts. Kollwitz
married social democrat doctor Karl Kollwitz in 1891 and moved with him to
his surgery in Berlins east-end tenement district, the inhabitants of
which became a major source for Kollwitzs art. The couple bore two sons,
Peter and Hans. In 1914 Peter died in action at the Front, further
politicising Kollwitzs practice against suffering humanity during the
Weimar era. Stylistically Kollwitz remained indebted to naturalism with
preferred subject matter of the poorest and most vulnerable members of
society, especially mothers and children, rendered with an expressionist
sensitivity and symbolic resonance. With the rise of Hitler in 1933
Kollwitz was dismissed from her professorship at the Prussian Academy of
Arts, labelled a degenerate artist and her studio closed. She died in
1945, survived by her youngest son Hans.

Kollwitzs first major graphic series The Weavers Revolt (1893-1897) was
inspired by Gerhard Hauptmanns eponymous play based on the historical
uprising of the Silesian weavers in 1844. It arose from Klingers challenge
to develop an epic suite of images linked by ideas, in which themes of
poverty, infant mortality, populist rebellion, conflict and oppression were
foregrounded. Peasants War (1903-1908), the next major print portfolio,
consisted of seven etchings constructed into a loose narrative cycle.
Kollwitz continued making graphic cycles before, during and after the First
World War, alongside sculptures, prints and posters including the
emotionally devastating Woman with Dead Child (1903), the poignant Memorial
to Karl Liebknecht (1919) and the arresting poster Nie Wieder Krieg! (Never
Again War!) (1924). The seven-image woodcut series War, (1924) is unique
amongst the many modern graphic cycles produced in response to the tenth
anniversary of the First World War in its complete absence of scenes of
combat or material destruction.  Instead, it focuses on the symbolic
perspective of wives, mothers and children on the home front in a visually
powerful series of universally understood themes of sacrifice and humanity.
The move from lithography to woodcut also signified a move towards greater
plasticity and modelling evident in her sculptures during this period,
including Tower of Mothers (1937-1938) and The Parents (1932) a monument to
Peter and his fallen comrades. In all of these latter works, it is the
grief, loss and sacrifice of the parents who are left behind that is the
focus and also the source of their universal humanitarian appeal within the
contexts of modernism.

Further Reading

Kollwitz, Kthe  The Diary and Letters of Kthe Kollwitz. Edited by Hans
Kollwitz. Illinois: Northwestern University Press, 1989.

Prelinger, Elizabeth et al (ed.) Kthe Kollwitz New Haven and London: Yale
University Press, 1992.

[505 words]

[pic]

Image: Kthe Kollwitz Woman with Dead Child 1903 (Hammer Museum, Los
Angeles)

(available: http://hammer.ucla.edu/image/2654/600/450.JPG)



