


Author: Jessica Stephenson

David Koloane, David  (b. 1938, Alexandra, Johannesburg, South Africa).

David Koloane is an important South African artist, critic, curator and
educator born in Johannesburg in 1938. From 1974 to 1977 he studied at the
Bill Ainslie Studios; thereafter he dedicated himself to improving access
to modern art education for black artists.  Koloane partnered with Bill
Ainslie on a number of projects, including establishing the Gallery in
1977, the first black-run exhibition space for modern art in Johannesburg.
He is a leading black educator, teaching at Fuba Academy in the 1980s. He
received a diploma in museum studies at the University of London (1985) and
became one of the first black curators in South Africa. From 1986 to 1988,
he was curator of the Fuba Art Gallery in Johannesburg, which housed a
collection of international modern art; he co-curated the Zabalaza
Festivals inLondon in 1990, and he also co-curated the exhibition Seven
Stories About Modern Art in Africa at Whitechapel Gallery, London  in
(U.K.) (1995). His Koloanes attendance at the 1983 international Triangle
Artist Workshop in New York led to the founding of the important Thupelo
Workshops in South Africa. In 1991 Koloane helped establish the Speedy Bag
Factory in Johannesburg, the first professional artist studio space
dedicated to combining cultural diversity with university educated artists.
 The Speedy Bag Factory continues to be an important platform for
contemporary art in post-apartheid South Africa.  [pic]

Koloanes art  paintings, drawings and prints  depicts the chaos, energy,
pain and intensity of apartheid and post-apartheid urban landscapes. His
subject matter draws on the spaces, traffic, mass protests, fighting stray
dogs, soccer mania, jazz music and detritus of urban townships. While these
topics resonate with the work of black township artists of the 1960s and
1970s, Koloanes work is suggestive, subtle, and expressive by contrast
with the representational and sometimes romanticized depictions
characteristic of earlier forms of township art.  He has exhibited widely
both within South Africa and abroad, and his work is represented in major
collections including the Iziko South African National Gallery, Cape Town,
the Johannesburg Art Gallery, University of Witwatersand Art Galleries,
Johannesburg, the Botswana National Museum, the Contemporary African Art
Collection of Jean Pigozzi, the BMW Collection, Germany, and the Franka
Severin Collection, London. Recognition for his contribution to art in
South Africa was made by the Dutch government with the Price Claus Fund in
1988. Koloane lives and works in Johannesburg, and is currently a board
member of the National Arts Council of South Africa.

References and Further Reading:

Koloane. D. (2004) Traversing and Transcending Spaces: The Roles of the
Artists Workshop and the Collective Studio in Contemporary SouthAfrica
in Gary van Wyk (ed.), A Decade of Democracy: Witnessing South Africa.
Johannesburg: Sondela.

Koloane. D and Ivor Powell (1995)  In Conversation in Seven Stories About
Modern Art in Africa, edited by Clementine Deliss. Paris and New York:
Flammarion, 140  156.

Peffer, J. (2009) Art and the End of Apartheid. Minneapolis: University if
Minnesota Press, 129  170.

Tadjo, V. (2002) David Koloane. London and New York: David Krut Publishers.




[pic]

Image caption:

The Night Has a Thousand Eyes. 2007  08. Mixed media on paper.

Source:
http://www.saatchigallery.com/artists/artpages/david_koloane_the_night_has_a
_thousand_eyes.htm




