
KRACAUER, Siegfried (1889-1966)

Siegfried Kracauer was born to a middle-class German Jewish family in
Frankfurt-am-Main. Though best known to English-speaking readers for his
film theory and criticism, Kracauer initially studied sociology under Georg
Simmel and Max Scheler and trained to be an architect. In 1915, he earned
his doctorate in engineering. His subsequent career as an architect failed,
and in 1921 Kracauer began writing freelance journalism. From 1924 to 1933,
he served as the editor of the Frankfurter Zeitung, a prestigious newspaper
read by the educated and liberal bourgeoisie. During the Weimar period,
Kracauer wrote copiously and published over two thousand articles, mostly
in the Frankfurter Zeitung. Many of these pieces appeared in the feuilleton
section of the paper, wherein Kracauer sought to provide a stimulating
critique of every day life, culture, fashion, arts, and film. It was during
the interwar years that he composed The Mass Ornament (1927; the original
essay The Mass Ornament appeared in 1922), a significant study and
critique, written in the vein of New Objectivism and inspired by Adolf
Loos, of the cult of distraction produced by Weimars unstable capitalist
culture. Kracauers critique of the ornament had a decisive influence on
Benjamins dialectical approach to novelty and on Adornos critique of the
rational will to the domination of nature. Kracauers most important
sociological work appeared as Die Angestellten (The Salaried Employees) in
1929-30, a study of the forms of cultural distraction (from sports to
entertainment) that had arisen to mollify a sickened workforce during the
depression. Much of Kracauers Weimar period writings were not  translated
into English until well after his death.

After fleeing Germany in 1933, Kracauer and his wife went to Paris. He made
a meager living by publishing fiction, essays, and cultural criticism,
including a study of Jacques Offenbach. In 1941, with the aid of Adorno,
Lowenthal and others, Kracauer and Lili sailed for New York City. Once in
the United States, Kracauer repudiated his German tongue, learned to write
in English, and turned his attention entirely to film criticism. While
working at the film library of the Museum of Modern Art and with the
support of the Experimental Division for the Study of War Time
Communications, a United States government division, Kracauer wrote several
studies of Nazi war propaganda. In 1947 he published the controversial
critique of national German cinema From Caligari to Hitler, which provoked
a heated debate among film historians, cultural critics, and political
writers alike. Though the book contributed to a narrative that demoralized
German nationalism and Weimar filmmakers, especially Fritz Lang, it is now
considered a seminal piece of socio-psychological film criticism. In 1960,
Kracauer published his second major work on cinema, Theory of Film: The
Redemption of Physical Reality, which offered a less political and more
sensorial critique of films effects on perception and experience.
Kracauers last book remained unfinished, but has been completed and edited
by Paul Oskar Kristeller and published under the title History: The Last
Things before the Last (1969). It is a book that attempts to avoid the
teleological concern with last things by confining the historians focus
to the delicate balance between mere chronology and the bundles of shaped
time that are the product of subjective understanding.

Bibliography:

Levin, Tom. "Siegfried Kracauer In English: A Bibliography." New German
Critique: An Interdisciplinary Journal Of German Studies 41 (1987): 140-
150. MLA International Bibliography. Web. 11 Apr. 2014.


Sarah E. Cornish
University of Northern Colorado
