Taylor & Francis – Encyclopedia of Modernism



About you

[Salutation]

Thomas

Patrick

Pringle



[Enter your biography]



McGill University



Your article

La Jetée (1962)

The Jetty

La Jetée is an influential ciné-roman (film-novel) made by Left Bank director Chris Marker. In a post-apocalyptic dystopia, scientists send an unnamed protagonist travelling through time in search of aid for the present, a process he survives because he retains a clear childhood memory of a woman standing on a jetty. Upon arriving in the past, the character meets the woman from his memory and falls in love, only to be recalled by his tormentors for further tasks. The film is aesthetically important for Marker’s use of still-photography, with the sole excepting one shot of subtle movement, and voice-over for narration.

La Jetée is an influential ciné-roman (film-novel) made by Left Bank director Chris Marker. In a post-apocalyptic dystopia, scientists send an unnamed protagonist travelling through time in search of aid for the present, a process he survives because he retains a clear childhood memory of a woman standing on a jetty. Upon arriving in the past, the character meets the woman from his memory and falls in love, only to be recalled by his tormentors for further tasks. The film is aesthetically important for Marker’s use of still-photography, with the sole excepting one shot of subtle movement, and voice-over for narration. The style is narratively significant, as the film poses time travel as an internal journey through recollected images, leaving open philosophical questions about cinema’s complex relation to time and memory. Each subsequent still image holds ties to both past and future. The protagonist eventually seeks refuge with his love in the past, only to be assassinated by a killer from the future. The death reenacts a memory carried by the protagonist, who, as a young boy, had already watched his own destined execution on the jetty. La Jetée has had enduring influence and has been the object of several homages, such as Terry Gilliam’s adaptation, Twelve Monkeys (1995).



File: La-Jetee.jpg

Figure 1.

Source: <http://www.soundonsight.org/sound-on-sights-best-films-ever-made>

Further reading:

(Alter)

(Cooper)

(Friedlander and Dolfin)

(Harbord)

(Lupton)