
Modern Lacquer painting in Vietnam

Today, lacquer painting (sn mi)  is  a  specifically  Vietnamese  form  of
expression. Its revival was largely due to the active  part  played  by  the
French and Vietnamese from the colonial era onwards and  the  foundation  of
the Ecole suprieure des Beaux-Arts de lIndochine in Hanoi, in 1924.  Prior
to this, lacquer painting was used by the Chinese  and  the  Japanese  then,
later, by the Vietnamese. At that time, lacquer painting was used  only  for
decorative purposes,  to  protect  and  embellish  religious  and  household
objects, thanks to its thick and glossy coat. After  the  1930s,  Vietnamese
artists tried to go further and develop the potential  of  this  traditional
technique. A lacquer workshop was organized  at  the  Ecole  suprieure  des
Beaux-Arts de lIndochine with the help of Vietnamese craftsmen  who  taught
the different steps to create  a  lacquer  painting.  Within  these  special
surroundings and then thanks to their  own  research,  Vietnamese  students,
budding artists, like Nguyn Gia Tr, Trn Vn Cn, Phm Hu kept on  trying
to increase the nuances of the medium and to give a superior relief  to  the
lacquer board through rubbing and polishing. Lacquer has  finally  become  a
new medium for either figurative, realist or abstract paintings.
      Lacquer is an organic substance which comes from a  tree  and  lacquer
painting remains an arduous and time  consuming  medium.  The  wooden  board
first  needs  to  be  prepared  with  various   undercoats,   amongst   them
traditional black lacquer that needs to be harden for hours  in  a  specific
hot and humid environment, then sanded down and polished  to  add  strength.
This smooth polished surface is then ready to receive the  drawing  and  the
different layers of coloured lacquers, which  will  build  up  to  form  the
work. Each layer is left to dry and then  burnished  in  water.  The  artist
will only discover the result of his work after the final  rubbing  down  of
the layers to let the right colour appear at the right place.  He  has  then
to keep in mind his drawing and the different layers of colours. Nguyn  Gia
Tr enjoyed this mental process as it appeared so fundamentally  opposed  to
oil painting.
Since the end of the 1990s, Vietnamese artists who recognise in this  medium
a way to stay connected with their past, carry on experiments  with  finding
new pigments that can be mixed with the lacquer,  or  texture  effects  like
sprinkling gold or silver leaf  dust,  pearl  powder  or  adding  shells  or
eggshells, etc.  However,  lacquer  process  needs  a  specific  environment
hardly conceivable with the crammed conditions in which  Vietnamese  artists
usually work, which could discourage some of  them.  Finally,  some  of  the
Vietnamese painters who have  become  masters  in  this  long  and  rigorous
technique provide, in return, training courses to European  artists  looking
for new ways of expressing themselves.

References and Further Reading

------- (2012) Du Fleuve Rouge au  Mkong,  Visions  du  Vit  Nam,  Paris:
Paris Muses, Editions Finlay.
-------  (2008)  Post  i  Mi.  Vietnamese  Art  after  1990,   Singapore:
Singapore Art Museum.


