
Mikhail Fedorovich Larionov (1881-1964)
[pic]

http://www.usc.edu/dept/LAS/IMRC/course_website/slides09/lario005_200w.htm



Mikhail Larionov: Boulevard Venus, 1913, Oil on canvas, 116x86cm.
Collection: Musee National dArt Moderne, Centre Georges Pompidou, Paris.

Image and reproduction rights need to be sought from the Reunion des Musees
Nationaux in Paris.

Copyright needs to be sought from ADAGP in Paris, or DACS (representing
ADAGP in the UK) or ARS (representing ADAGP in the USA).


Mihail Larionov was the leader of the Russian artistic vanguard in Moscow
in the years before the First World War. He was a vivacious and highly
talented painter, book illustrator and exhibition organiser. During 1909-
1912 he employed a highly distinctive expressonist style of painting called
NEO-PRIMITIVISM which, in its frank celebration of popular culture, was
calculated to offend polite taste.  Subsequently he made his name as a
Russian futurist and engaged in an innovative form of abstract and non-
objective painting called RAYONISM which prepared the way for Malevichs
SUPREMATISM and Tatlins CONSTRUCTIVISM. In 1915 Larionov, along with his
partner, the painter Natalia GONCHAROVA, left Russia to work as a stage
designer for Diaghilevs BALLETS RUSSES.

Larionov was born in Tiraspol, then Bessarabia in 1881 and was sent to
Moscow for his secondary education. In 1898 he began to study painting at
the Moscow School of Art and here he met his future life-long colleague and
partner Natalia Goncharova. Larionov reached maturity in 1909 when, having
undergone the impact of Paul Gauguin, Vincent van Gogh, Paul Czanne, Henri
Matisse and the Fauves he engaged in a rebarbative style of painting that
he subsequently called NEO-PRIMITIVISM. On the one hand these works
represented a critique of the artificiality of bourgeois manners (Walk in a
Provincial Town, Moscow: Tretiakov Gallery) whilst on the other they
celebrated the vitality and authenticiy of a supposed primitiveness
exemplified by the those considered beyond the parameters of polite
borgeois society such as peasants, gypsies, squaddies and prostitutes
(Katsap Venus, Nizhny-Novgorod: Art Museum). At the formal level the
paintings recall the schematic and expressive forms of the Russian lubok
print, Russian icon, signboard paintings, graffiti and childrens art. A
cycle of four paintings entitled The Seasons (Moscow: Tretiakov Gallery &
Paris: MNAM) was completed in 1913 and represents the apogee of the style.

In 1912 Larionov began to explore the possibilities of CUBISM and FUTURISM
in works such as Boulevard Venus (Paris: MNAM) whilst also developing a
radical form of abstraction called RAYONISM (Luchizm). A series of brightly
coloured non-objective Rayonist Constructions executed in 1913 represented
the cutting edge of Russian avant-garde art in the years before the war and
paved the way for the subsequently development of SUPREMATISM and
CONSTRUCTIVISM. Larionov was also fundamental to the development of the
Russian avant-garde at this time as an organizer of controversial art
exhibitions. He played a key role in the foundation of the Knave of
Diamonds exhibition society (first exhibition Moscow: 1910-11) and
subsequently organized The Donkeys Tail (Moscow, 1912), The Target
(Moscow, 1913) and No. 4 (Moscow, 1914) exhibitions which fostered and
presented emerging talent. Kazimir MALEVICH and Vladimir TATLIN both
reached artistic maturity within these groupings. With Natalia GONCHAROVA,
Larionov also founded a Futurist theatre known as Teatr Futu and starred in
the very first film to involve the artistic avant-garde: Drama in the
Futurists Cabaret No. 13 (Moscow, 1913. Director: Kasyanov, no longer
extant).

Larionov  assisted Goncharova in her designs for Diaghilevs staging of
Rimsky-Korsakovs Le coq dor, in Paris in 1914. The two artists also held
a retrospective exhibition at the Galerie Paul Guillaume before returning
to Moscow on the outbreak of war. Larionov saw active service on the
Eastern Front but was wounded in 1915 and invalided out of the army.
Suffering from shell-shock he never completely recovered his ability to
concentrate. He travelled to Switzerland with Goncharova later in the year
and joined Diaghilevs BALLETS RUSSES as a stage designer. His work for
Diaghilev included sets and costumes for Soleil de minuit (1915), Chout ou
le bouffon (1921), Le Renard (first version 1921, second version 1929). He
subsequently staged Massines Port Said and Lifars Sur le Borysthne. In
the years after the war he settled in Paris with Goncharova where he became
a leading member of the cole de Paris, working as a painter, graphic
artist, exhibition organiser and also as Goncharovasimpressario and
manager. He died in a care home at Fontenay-aux-Roses, Paris in 1964. He is
now widely recognized as one of the leading exponents of Russian modernism
alongside artists such as Goncharova, Malevich, Tatlin and Rodchenko.


References and further reading:

Literature:

Eganbiuri, Eli (1913), Natalia Goncharova. Mikhail Larionov, Moscow:
Miunster.

George, Waldemar (1966), Michel Larionov, Paris: Bibliothque des Arts

Kovalev, A. E. (2005), Mikhail Larionov v Rossii 1881-1915, Moskva:
Khudozhestevennaia Gallereia Elizium

Kovtun, Evgeniy (1998), Mikhail Larionov, Bournemouth (UK): Parktsone Press

Loguine, T. (1971), Gontcharova et Larionov: 50 Ans  St. Germain-des-Prs:
Tmoignages et Documents, Paris: ditions Klincksieck

MNAM (Muse National dArt Moderne, Paris), 1995: Nathalie Gontcharova 
Michel Larionov: Collections du Muse National dArt Moderne, Paris: Centre
Georges Pompidou

Parton, Anthony (1993), Mikhail Larionov and the Russian Avant-Garde,
Princeton / London: Princeton University Press  / Thames & Hudson.

Pospelov, Gleb & Iliukhina, E. (2005), Mikhail Larionov: Zhivopis, grafika,
teatr, Moskva: Izd. Galart & Izd. RA (Russkiy Avanagard).

Tretiakov Gallery (Moscow) (1999): Mikhail Larionov  Natalia Goncharova:
Shedevry is parizhskogo naslediia: zhivopis (major exhibition catalogue)

Warren, Sarah (2013): Mikhail Larionov and the Cultural Politics of Late
Imperial Russia, Farnham (UK): Ashgate
