
Bart Bryant-Mole
Durham University

Lautner, John Edward (1911-1994)

Introductory paragraph:

While the American architect John Lautner may not have considered himself a
Modernist, he nevertheless made a significant contribution to the branch of
Modernist architecture that emerged in Southern California during the mid-
20th century, pioneered by architects such as RUDOLPH SCHINDLER , RICHARD
NEUTRA and FRANK LLOYD WRIGHT. Though he was wary of being seen as an
imitator of Wright, under whom he had worked as an apprentice for six
years, Lautners work does reflect several of his mentors architectural
principles, such as flowing space, harmony with nature and site-specific
designs. Lautners visually arresting buildings, however, took these ideas
further than ever before. His ambitious projects, as well as being
architecturally innovative, were feats of modern engineering. These daring
structures stood in stark contrast to the minimal, machine-influenced
INTERNATIONAL STYLE buildings which had dominated Modernist architecture
since the 1930s. Lautners residential projects, in particular, gained
widespread attention through the photography of Julius Shulman, their
appearance in Hollywood films and their endorsement by the rich and famous
of Los Angeles. While contemporaneous critics were divided in their
opinions of Lautners work, he later achieved international acknowledgement
and respect, and is now considered an important figure within the Mid-
Century Modern design movement.

Main text:

In 1933, the American architect John Lautner was accepted onto Frank Lloyd
Wrights innovative Taliesin Fellowship programme. He worked under Wright
for the next six years, taking an active part in the build of Taliesin West
(1937) and supervising several other projects, before leaving to set up his
own practice in Los Angeles.

Lautner made a conscious decision to develop his own distinctive
architectural style, taking his mentors principle of flowing space to new
extremes by blurring the boundary between the interior and the exterior of
the building. Faades are dissolved by sheet glass walls, with broken
canopies and skylights creating an intermediary space that connects the
inside with the outside. Like Wright, Lautner took his inspiration from
nature, giving rise to free, organic forms. Lautners designs work with the
surrounding landscape, on occasions bringing it physically into the
building. Such is the case with the Elrod House (1968), where exposed stone
from the foundations of the site forms an internal wall. This unity of
nature and architecture is a theme that permeated Lautners work throughout
his career.

Lautners radical designs were visually arresting, with many of his
buildings, such as the Sheats Goldstein Residence (1963), appearing to defy
gravity with vast, unsupported canopies. Lautner embraced new building
technologies and materials in order to realise his ambitious projects. One
example of this is the Reiner Residence, or Silvertop (1963-67), where
Lautner made use of post-tensioned concrete to create the sweeping,
unbroken planes of the roof and the cantilevered driveway.

Lautners preliminary research of each site and the surrounding topography
led to unique and site-specific designs. One such example is the Malin
Residence, also known as Chemosphere (1960), where the challenge of a
steeply-sloping site in an earthquake zone was met with the imaginative
solution of sitting the house atop a twenty-nine foot high concrete
column.

Lautner received both residential and commercial commissions; the latter
consisting primarily of roadside buildings. Examples include Henrys drive-
ins (1947, 1957) and the coffee shop Googies (1949), from which GOOGIE
ARCHITECTURE takes its name. These buildings are characterised by eye-
catching, angular forms, the use of multiple, contrasting materials and a
lack of formality. They did not meet with universal critical acclaim
however, criticised by some as being undisciplined or kitsch.

Lautner found greater success with commissions for private homes. His
houses, with their open-plan interiors, panoramic city views and luxurious
swimming pools, epitomised the opulence of Southern Californian living.
Several of his works made their way into Hollywood films; the Elrod House,
for example, features in the 1971 James Bond film Diamonds Are Forever.

Overall, Lautner produced nearly two hundred designs, of which over one
hundred were constructed. Although he never received any large-scale public
commissions and his commercial designs were often subject to negative
reviews, Lautners private homes occupy a significant place in the Mid-
Century Modern design movement.

List of works

1949        Googies Coffee Shop, Los Angeles, California, USA
1960        Malin Residence (Chemosphere), Los Angeles, California, USA
1962        Garcia Residence, Los Angeles, California, USA
1963        Sheats Goldstein Residence, Beverly Hills, California, USA
1963        Reiner Residence (Silvertop), Los Angeles, California, USA
1968        Elrod House, Palm Springs, California, USA
1973        Arango Residence (Casa Marbrisa), Acapulco, Mexico

References

 Treats! Magazine interview with Goldstein
http://treatsmagazine.com/video/goldsteinland/

 L.A. Times Chemosphere photo gallery
http://www.latimes.com/features/home/la-hm-john-lautner-chemosphere-
photos,0,1972395.photogallery

 John Lautner Foundation  Movies featuring Lautner buildings
http://www.johnlautner.org/wp/?p=32


Further reading

Bryant-Mole, B (2013) Googie Architecture: A Reflection of Post-War
America, Durham: Durham University. Unpublished dissertation.

Campbell-Lange, B.A. (1999) John Lautner, New York: Taschen

Cohen, J.L., Escher, F. & Olsberg, N. (2008) Between Earth and Heaven: The
Architecture of John Lautner, New York: Rizzoli

Hess, A. & Weintraub, A. (1999) The Architecture of John Lautner, New York:
Rizzoli

L.A. Times  The architecture of John Lautner photo gallery
http://www.latimes.com/features/la-hm-lautner0410-pg,0,7076729.photogallery

Lecture given by John Lautner at Southern California Institute of
Architecture (23 January, 1991)
http://sma.sciarc.edu/video/john-lautner/.

Visual material

[pic]
John Lautner, photographer unknown
Copyright: John Lautner Foundation
http://media.npr.org/assets/img/2011/12/02/lautner-3-photographer-unknown-
9803203c2f5e3a2b4f0fe2ebcca94145d16a9ff0-s6-c10.jpg


[pic]
Interior of Elrod House, photo by Murray Grigor
Copyright: John Lautner Foundation
http://media.npr.org/assets/img/2011/12/02/elrod_murray-grigor_01-
7f17f1a6d667f5965ca7800424721c5940c603b2-s6-c10.jpg

[pic]
Silvertop, photo by Julius Shulman
Copyright: Getty Research Institute
http://blogs.getty.edu/iris/happy-100th-birthday-john-lautner/


[pic]
Googies Coffee Shop, photo by Julius Shulman
Copyright: Getty Research Institute
http://blogs.getty.edu/iris/happy-100th-birthday-john-lautner/
