
Lim, Hak Tai (1893-1963)
Lim Hak Tai, a Chinese migr artist based in Singapore, was the founding
principal and dean of the Nanyang Academy of Fine Arts (NAFA). Established
officially in 1938, with support from Jimei School Overseas Fellowship
Association and the Society of Chinese Artists, NAFA was the first local
academy offering tertiary art education in Southeast Asia and was
instrumental, under Lims leadership, in nurturing Malayan (present-day
Singapore and Malaysia) modern art practitioners. Modelled primarily on the
curriculum of Xiamen Academy of Fine Arts, NAFA offered training in both
Western art and Chinese painting. Lims influential vision, to cultivate a
Nanyang (style) art that reflected the reality of Nanyang (South Seas) in
the articulation of tropical colours, cultures and local flavour, was
integral to the academys objectives and was elaborated in his articles and
speeches. As much of his energy was expended on teaching and operating the
school, Lim left behind few works, approximately 100 artworks ranging from
oil paintings, Chinese paintings and calligraphy.
Born on May 1893 in Xiamen, Lim was a trained Applied Arts and Mathematics
teacher from the Fujian Teachers Training College. His teaching vocation
included Jimei College and Xiamen Academy of Fine Arts which he co-founded
in 1923. In 1962, he was awarded the Certificate of Honour at Singapores
first National Day honours ceremony. He passed away in 1963 after battling
a series of illnesses. He was succeeded by his son, Lim Yew Kuan, who was
principal of NAFA between 1963-1979.
References and further reading
(2011) Crossing visions: Singapore and Xiamen: Lim Hak Tai and Lim Yew Kuan
art exhibition, Singapore: Nanyang Academy of Fine Arts. (A comprehensive
catalogue for an exhibition held at Xiamen Art Museum with text in English
and Chinese that provided a rich biography of Lim Hak Tai and art
historical survey of his works.)
 (2009) Lim Hak Tai: Quintessential Nanyang. Singapore: Nanyang Academy of
Fine Arts. (An exhibition catalogue produced in celebration for the 70th
anniversary of the Academys founding and includes biographical data and
coloured illustrations.)
Ong, Z.M. (2006) A History of the Nanyang Academy of Fine Arts (1938-1990),
National University of Singapore, Department of History. (An unpublished
Masters thesis that provided insightful historical research on the founding
and development of the academy, its founders and curriculum.)
Piyadasa, R. & Sabapathy, T.K (1979) Pameran Retrospektif Pelukis-Pelukis
Nanyang, Kuala Lumpur: National Museum of Art, 1979. (An influential
exhibition catalogue that provided the first extant study on the influence
of the academy as Nanyang artists in the modernist art discourses of
Singapore and Malaysia, and the role Lim Hak Tai played in articulating his
vision of a Nanyang-style art.)
Tan, M. K. (1997) The evolution of the Nanyang art style: A study in the
search for an artistic identity in Singapore, 1930-1960. Hong Kong
University of Science and Technology. (An unpublished Masters thesis that
sought to explain the origins and meaning of the Nanyang art style as a
subjective artistic phenomenon.)


