Taylor & Francis – Encyclopedia of Modernism



About you

[Salutation]

Rafael

Urano

Frajndlich



[Enter your biography]



Universidade de São Paulo



Your article

	Lima, João Filgueiras (1932-)

‘Lelé’

João “Lelé” Filgueiras Lima is a public architect. Since his formative years in the construction sites of Brasília (1960) until today, his most remarkable works were made in public branches. This aspect of his career led him to take a very plastic approach relying always on economic building strategies, often developing new techniques and industrial materials. 

João “Lelé” Filgueiras Lima is a public architect. Since his formative years in the construction sites of Brasília (1960) until today, his most remarkable works were made in public branches. This aspect of his career led him to take a very plastic approach relying always on economic building strategies, often developing new techniques and industrial materials. 



Lelé’s interest in industrial building parts led him to design pieces of his own which he used in early public works, such as the Taguatinga Hospital (1965) and the Secretariats of Bahia Administration Center (1973). Lelé had a breakthrough when he designed hospitals for the Sarah Kubitschek Foundation. In Brasília’s Hospital for Diseases of the Motor Organs (1980), he managed, in an integrated approach, to fill the normative standards for a rehabilitation facility, keep to a tight budget and address the very hot temperatures caused by local weather. A lag between the building’s stories allows all recovering rooms to access a well-shaded green terrace, and the structure and cladding are made of prefabricated reinforced concrete, articulated with one-story high Virendell beams.



Brasilia’s Hospital became a reference point, giving Lelé authority to express his own deas. In his next projects, the structures would be lighter and the process of building faster. Steel would be used in structures as they were in ventilation sheds. For cladding, Lelé worked with a technique of prefabricated reinforced mortar. Reinforced mortar is an economic and light material, easy to make and easy to handle in building sites. 



This combination of steel and ‘prefab’ reinforced mortar is Lelé’s favourite and is used in his projects today. The method allowed Lelé to make the most of his expression through industrialised materials. The Sarah Kubitschek Locomotor Apparatus Hospital (1988) in Salvador has such a ‘plastic aspect’ that at first glance it hardly resembles an industrialised construction. Heat was once again an important issue to be solved, and was addressed using a succession of gardens and natural ventilation systems, including a ground cooling system. The reinforced mortar walls had patterns designed by Brazilian artist Athos Bulcão. 



Fig: Lele

Sarah Kubitschek Locomotor Apparatus Hospital, 1988. comover-arq.blogspot.com 



Lelé designed hospitals in almost all the capitals of Northern Brazil, even establishing a factory just to build his special pieces—the Technology Center of Rede Sarah (1992). There he perfected his techniques, and the results can be seen in subsequent works such as Rede Sarah’s hospitals in Belo Horizonte (1993), a new unit built in Brasilia (1995) and in Rio de Janeiro (2009). 



Lelé’s recent works include housing designs for middle-sized cities in Brazil (2011), as part of a national initiative by the government. He is broadly recognised for his very peculiar work as an architect capable of giving unique forms to his projects through a modular, component based system of constructive pieces. 





List of works



1962: Housing units for professors of the University of Brasília, Brasília, Brazil



1965: Taguatinga Hospital, Taguatinga, Brazil



1973: Secretariats of Bahia Administration Center, Salvador, Brazil



1980: Industrialized schools, Salvador, Brazil/ Hospital for Diseases of The Motor Organs, Brasília, Brazil



1984: Abadiânia Factory, Goiania, Brazil



1988: Sarah Kubitschek Locomotor Apparatus Hospital, Salvador, Brazil



1992: Technology Center of Rede Sarah Kubitschek, Salvador, Brazil



2009: Sarah Kubitschek Hospital, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil



2011: Housing units system for brazilian government



Further reading:



(Banda)



(Latorraca)