
The Long Poem

In its most basic sense, the long poem refers to any extended poetic
work, from the long lyric to the epic.  Within the context of modernism,
the long poem emerged as a significant genre, channeling the authority and
scope of the epic yet rejecting many traditional epic devices.  Most
notably, many modernist long poems abandoned narrative, replacing it with
other organizational principles, ranging from symbolism to collage.  The
practice became particularly significant within the context of Anglo-
American modernism, largely due to the influence of T.S. Eliot and Ezra
Pound, although the long poem can also be considered a transnational genre,
with examples in French, such as Saint-John Perses Anabase (1924), and
Spanish, like Federico Garca Lorcas sequence Poeta en Nueva York (1940).

One of the most famous and influential examples of the genre is Eliots The
Waste Land, published in 1922.  Adapting mythological themes, literary
allusions, and a symbolic framework, Eliots work combined the traditional
historical rhetoric of earlier long poetics, from Chaucer to the Arthurian
legends, with the language and concerns of World War I England.   Eliot
relied heavily on fragments and quotations to create the poems extended
structure; this technique was further developed by Ezra Pound in The Cantos
(1917-72), which has been cited as the first example of literary collage in
English-language poetics.  Pounds own ambition, to write a poem
containing history, resulted in a work that ranged from ancient China to
modern Italy in its references, allusions, themes, and techniques.  Like
The Waste Land, Pounds work is organized according to juxtaposition and
repetition, placing references side-by-side to develop new insights.  Since
Pounds personal ambitions were often political and economic, The Cantos
exemplify the didactic and pedagogical possibilities of the traditional
epic in a non-narrative, modern form.  Other poets would employ similar
techniques, including Louis Zukofsky for his long poem A (1928-74) and,
moving into the midcentury, Charles Olson in The Maximus Poems (1953-69).

The modernist long poem is not limited to the strategies of Pound and
Eliot, however.  Wallace Stevens wrote several important extended lyrics,
such as Auroras of Autumn and his ars poetica Notes Toward a Supreme
Fiction.  In a more traditional rhetorical and national mode, Hart Cranes
The Bridge (1930) attempted to develop an alternative American history
through a visionary and ecstatic address, far removed from the
scholasticism and impersonality of The Cantos.  Narrative epics were not
entirely abandoned in the period; Stephen Vincent Bents John Browns Body
(1928) retells the American Civil War using many classical epic devices.

The late modernist period saw a new proliferation of the long poem, both by
emerging and established writers.  Eliot and H.D. responded to World War II
with long poems, Eliot through the Christianity of Four Quartets (1943),
H.D. through the sequence Trilogy (1944-46).  The latter work combines
Egyptian mythology, Christian and Jewish scriptures, esoteric knowledge,
and hermeticism into a sustained analysis of destruction and rebirth, using
the space of the long poem to establish these diverse connections.  H.D.s
later Helen in Egypt (1961) further challenged the long poems traditional
male perspective, placing Helen of Troys voice at the center of the work.
William Carlos Williamss late Paterson (1946-63) blends narrative and
collage poetics into an analysis of place, the eponymous Paterson, New
Jersey.  Elsewhere, the long poem became a tool for further challenging the
ethnic and racial limitations of modernist practice: the African-American
poet Melvin Tolsons important Harlem Gallery (1965) adapted the citational
and collage techniques of Pound to the cultural heritage of Black America.
 These later extensions of the modernist long poem anticipated contemporary
and postmodern experiments with the form, which include the use of
seriality, mathematically generated sequences, and journalistic writing
practices.

Select Criticism
Baker, Peter. Obdurate Brilliance: Exteriority and the Modern Long Poem.
      Gainsville: U of Florida P, 1991.
Bernstein, Michael Andr. The Tale of the Tribe: Ezra Pound and the Modern
      Verse Epic. Princeton: Princeton UP, 1980.
Dickie, Margaret. On the Modernist Long Poem. Iowa City: U of Iowa P, 1986.
McHale, Brian. The Obligation Toward the Difficult Whole: Postmodernist
      Long Poems. Tuscaloosa: U of Alabama P, 2004.
Walker, Jeffrey. Bardic Ethos and the American Epic Poem: Whitman, Pound,
      Crane, Williams, Olson. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State UP, 1989.

