
Los Olvidados (1950)

Justus Nieland (Michigan State University)

Directed by the great Spanish surrealist Luis Buuel, Los Olvidados (The
Young and the Damned), is an ironic pseudo-documentary about the adolescent
lives of Mexico Citys slum-dwellers, and the first great film of Buuels
Mexican period. Having established his avant-garde credentials in his first
two surrealist masterpieces, Un chien andalou (1929) and Lge dor (1930),
Buuel, in the late 30s and 40s, was a political exile from General
Francos fascist Spain. Under these circumstances, the radical artist
became a commercially successful director in the Mexican film industry,
where he directed a series of subversive films that married formal
experimentation with popular appeal, generating a kind of vernacular
modernism. Inspired by the authenticity of Vittorio De Sicas neorealist
study of postwar Italys impoverished, scrappy youth, Sciusci
(Shoeshine)(1946), Bunuels producer pitched Los Olvidados as a way of
capitalizing on a postwar vogue for melodramatic films about poor, loveable
urchinsa trend also evident in the Mexicos own cine de arrabal (slum
film), sentimental pictures about urban destitution. No feel-good film
about the noble, happy poor, Los Olvidados instead tracks the short, brutal
life of young Pedro, preyed upon by a malevolent tough named Jaibo, but
more importantly, victimized by Mexicos explosive state-sponsored
modernization schemes under President Miguel Alemn. Even as cosmopolitan
Mexico City dreams of progress and modernization, young citizens like Pedro
and Jaibo are systematically dehumanized and discarded, left without
futures in a present marked by irrationality, violence, and abjection. A
Mexican film noir, Los Olvidados includes a celebrated dream sequence about
Pedros privation, but its artistic achievement lies in its cynical
manipulation of documentary, neorealist, and melodramatic codes. Opting for
disorientation and strategic cruelty, Los Olvidados disallows spectatorial
sympathy, or catharsis, and liberal heart-warming.

Bibliography

Acevedo-Muoz, Ernesto R. Buuel and Mexico: The Crisis of National Cinema.
      Berkeley: University of California Press, 1993.

Buuel, Luis. Cinema, an Instrument of Poetry, in The Shadow and Its
Shadow:     Surrealist Writings on Cinema, ed. Paul Hammond. San Franciso:
City Lights      Books, 2000. 112-16.

Fay, Jennifer and Justus Nieland. Film Noir and the Culture of
Internationalism, in  Film Noir: Hard-Boiled Modernity and the Cultures of
Globalization. London:       New York and London: Routledge, 2010.

Polizzotti, Mark. Los Olvidados. London: British Film Institute, 2006.
