Taylor & Francis – Encyclopedia of Modernism



About you

[Salutation]

Adam

R.

McKee



[Enter your biography]



Florida State University



Your article

The Lost Generation

[Enter any variant forms of your headword – OPTIONAL]

The ‘Lost Generation’ is a group of expatriate American writers who came of age during World War I and subsequently became prominent literary figures following the war. The term can also be used to refer to the whole of the post-World War I generation. The term was coined by Gertrude Stein in a comment to Ernest Hemingway in which she declared, ‘You are all a lost generation’. Hemingway subsequently used this phrase as an epigraph to his novel The Sun Also Rises (1926) which is often seen as emblematic of the lost generation’s literary tradition. This generation was ‘lost’ because of the alienation they felt for American culture and the fact that the values they had grown up with no longer functioned in a post-World War I world. The group of writers associated with the Lost Generation includes Ernest Hemingway, F. Scott Fitzgerald, John Dos Passos, e.e. cummings, Sherwood Anderson, Malcolm Cowley, Gertrude Stein, and Djuna Barnes.

The ‘Lost Generation’ is a group of expatriate American writers who came of age during World War I and subsequently became prominent literary figures following the war. The term can also be used to refer to the whole of the post-World War I generation. The term was coined by Gertrude Stein in a comment to Ernest Hemingway in which she declared, ‘You are all a lost generation’. Hemingway subsequently used this phrase as an epigraph to his novel The Sun Also Rises (1926) which is often seen as emblematic of the lost generation’s literary tradition. This generation was ‘lost’ because of the alienation they felt for American culture and the fact that the values they had grown up with no longer functioned in a post-World War I world. The group of writers associated with the Lost Generation includes Ernest Hemingway, F. Scott Fitzgerald, John Dos Passos, e.e. cummings, Sherwood Anderson, Malcolm Cowley, Gertrude Stein, and Djuna Barnes.

Further reading:



(Cowley, Exile’s Return)



(Cowley, A Second Flowering: Works and Days of the Lost Generation)



(Dolan)



(Hemingway)



(Monk)