
Magritte, Ren Franois Ghislain (18981967)

Ren Magritte was a Belgian artist who gained notoriety during the interwar
period as a painter and for his involvement with Surrealism. His
epigrammatic approach to painting, using collage-like juxtapositions and
absurd transformations, developed from his preference for figurative
representation and interest in the relation of images to poetic language.
Although Magritte presented himself as contentedly bourgeois, his paintings
were often intended to shock viewers by showing them what he called the
mystery of the world. Magritte was born in the town of Lessines, but grew
up in Chtelet where his father had become successful in the edible oil
industry. Here he experienced a great childhood loss upon his mothers
suicide. Magritte first discovered painting as a boy, having encountered a
painter working outdoors at an abandoned cemetery. In 1915, Magritte
relocated to Brussels and soon undertook a brief period of study at the
Acadmie Royale des Beaux-Arts until 1918. Magrittes paintings during the
early 1920s exhibited Futurist and Cubist influences. Collaborating closely
during this period, Magritte and the abstract painter Victor Servranckx
published an essay in 1922 entitled Pure Art: A Defence of the Aesthetic.
Uneasy, however, with abstract paintings reception as art for arts sake,
Magritte was deeply affected, in 1923, by what he called the triumphant
poetry of certain Giorgio de Chirico paintings emphasising the stillness
and isolation of figures and objects. Magritte thereafter developed a
similar approach to composition, as seen in The Lost Jockey (1926).




[pic]

Ren Magritte, Clairvoyance (Self-Portrait), 1936

http://www.wikipaintings.org/en/rene-magritte/clairvoyance-self-portrait-
1936


During the mid-to-late 1920s, Magritte helped establish the Belgian
Surrealist group, the first international offshoot of the Parisian
movement. To foster a closer alliance with the movements founder, Andr
Breton (18961966), Magritte relocated to Paris in 1927. Here he began
formulating his word-and-image paintings. In The Hidden Woman (1929),
Magritte combined a nude female figure and painted words into a rebus that
read I do not see the [woman] hidden in the forest. Despite the praise
Magritte received from Bretons circle for his contributions to the groups
journal La Rvolution Surrealiste, Breton himself would not write about
Magrittes work until 1964. Strained relations with the Surrealists in
Paris influenced Magrittes return to Brussels in 1930.

Despite having to work as a commercial artist throughout his career,
Magritte remained an innovator in modern art after his return to Belgium.
Formerly his images had relied on illogical juxtapositions to shock the
viewer, whereas certain paintings of the 1930s onward posited two states of
a single object seemingly logical in isolation but palpably unsettling when
presented together, such as the egg and bird in Clairvoyance (1936).

Magrittes lasting legacy was aided by the popularity of a single work, The
Treachery of Images (1929), which presents the image of a tobacco pipe with
the words this is not a pipe painted below it. This work garnered much
critical attention including that of French philosopher Michel Foucault,
whose commentary on the piece, entitled This is Not A Pipe, was published
in 1968. Today this painting resides in the Los Angeles County Museum of
Art, while many other Magritte works are housed at the Muse Magritte in
Brussels.

References and further reading

Sylvester, D. and S. Whitfield (1992) Ren Magritte, London; New York:
Menil Foundation; Philip Wilson Publishers.

Whitfield, S. (1992) Magritte, London: South Bank Centre.

Gablik, S. (1985) Magritte, London: Thames & Hudson.

Sylvester, D. (1992) Magritte, New York; Brussels: Menil Foundation;
Mercatorfonds.

Allmer, P. (2009) Ren Magritte: Beyond Painting, Manchester: Manchester
U.P.

Canonne, X. (2007) Surrealism in Belgium, 1924-2000, Brussels; London:
Mercatorfonds; Thames & Hudson.

Breton, A. (2002) Surrealism and Painting, Boston; New York: MFA
Publications.


http://vimeo.com/4991360 (Interview with Magritte on the subjects of
poetry, familiarity, strangeness, desire, and logic. Excerpt from 1978 film
Monsieur Ren Magritte, directed by Adrian Maben. Language: French).

http://www.wikipaintings.org/en/rene-magritte (Online gallery of over 300
Magritte paintings, including early works and variants, organized either
chronologically or alphabetically).


