Taylor & Francis – Encyclopedia of Modernism



About you

[Salutation]

Eric

Matthew

Bledsoe



[Enter your biography]



[Enter the institution with which you are affiliated]



Your article

‘Make It New’

[Enter any variant forms of your headword – OPTIONAL]

Ezra Pound’s modernist imperative and his 1934 collection of essays by the same name. ‘Make It New’ compels the writer to create out of the material of art work that is distinctively innovative. The artist must break with the formal and contextual standards of his or her contemporaries in making works fundamentally individual. These ‘new’ modern works cannot be wholly autonomous however as they must consider the aesthetics of the past in the context of the present moment. The term first appears in Pound’s ‘Canto LIII’ (written in the early 1930s) in the form of Chinese ideograms that he is said to have taken from a Shang imperial bathtub. The term is not limited to Pound’s work as it describes a prevalent attitude in modernism. One can trace the idea of ‘Make It New’ to the early avant-garde literary and artistic movements at the beginning of the twentieth century (i.e. imagism, vorticism, futurism, and others). An edict characteristic of the principles of modernism, ‘Make It New’ calls the artist to react against historical conventions while simultaneously engaging in a dialogue with literary and cultural traditions.

Ezra Pound’s modernist imperative and his 1934 collection of essays by the same name. ‘Make It New’ compels the writer to create out of the material of art work that is distinctively innovative. The artist must break with the formal and contextual standards of his or her contemporaries in making works fundamentally individual. These ‘new’ modern works cannot be wholly autonomous however as they must consider the aesthetics of the past in the context of the present moment. The term first appears in Pound’s ‘Canto LIII’ (written in the early 1930s) in the form of Chinese ideograms that he is said to have taken from a Shang imperial bathtub. The term is not limited to Pound’s work as it describes a prevalent attitude in modernism. One can trace the idea of ‘Make It New’ to the early avant-garde literary and artistic movements at the beginning of the twentieth century (i.e. imagism, vorticism, futurism, and others). An edict characteristic of the principles of modernism, ‘Make It New’ calls the artist to react against historical conventions while simultaneously engaging in a dialogue with literary and cultural traditions.

Further reading:

(Kenner)

(Levenson)

 (Pound)

(Pound, Make It New)