Taylor & Francis – Encyclopedia of Modernism



About you

[Salutation]

David

[Middle name]

Beard



[Enter your biography]



University of Minnesota



Your article

Malinowski, Bronisław (1884-1942)

Malinowski, Bronisław Kasper (1884-1942)

Born Bronisław Kasper Malinowski to a family in the Polish nobility (the szlachta), Malinowski made contributions to anthropology through his text Argonauts of the Western Pacific (1922) and to linguistic anthropology in Coral Gardens and their Magic (1935). Travelling to the Trobriand Islands, Malinowski documented the life, customs and traditions of Melanesian people using systematic observation in ethnographic field notes and photography. This rich description of the Trobrianders set the standard for scientific ethnographic practice in his book A Scientific Theory of Culture (1944).

Born Bronisław Kasper Malinowski to a family in the Polish nobility (the szlachta), Malinowski made contributions to anthropology through his text Argonauts of the Western Pacific (1922) and to linguistic anthropology in Coral Gardens and their Magic (1935). Travelling to the Trobriand Islands, Malinowski documented the life, customs and traditions of Melanesian people using systematic observation in ethnographic field notes and photography. This rich description of the Trobrianders set the standard for scientific ethnographic practice in his book A Scientific Theory of Culture (1944). Malinowski was a participant within modernist conversations about language, sexuality and culture in monographs that would engage the ideas of Joseph Conrad and Sigmund Freud, such as Crime and Custom in Savage Society (1926), Freedom and Civilization (1947) and Sex, Culture and Myth (1962). C. K. Ogden and I. A. Richards would publish a précis of his linguistic anthropology in their statement on language, The Meaning of Meaning (1923). The publication of Malinowski’s diaries marked the end of the modern period for anthropology. Clifford Geertz and others would use the tension between the alleged objectivity of the ethnographic text and the personal demons Malinowski grappled with in the diaries to illustrate that the claim to objectivity in ethnographic writings is illusory. Having eroded claims to objectivity, Geertz ushered in postmodern discussions of the making of knowledge in anthropology as a discipline.



List of Works

(1922) Argonauts of the Western Pacific: An Account of Native Enterprise and Adventure in the Archipelagos of Melanesian New Guinea, London: G. Routledge & Sons; New York, E. P. Dutton & Co.

(1926) Crime and Custom in Savage Society, London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner & Co.

(1935) Coral Gardens and their Magic, London: George Allen & Unwin, 2 vols.

(1944) Freedom and Civilization, New York: Roy Publishers.

(1944) A Scientific Theory of Culture, Chapel Hill: The University of North Carolina Press.

(1962) Sex, Culture and Myth, New York: Harcourt, Brace & World.

(1967) A Diary in the Strict Sense of the Term, New York, Harcourt, Brace & World.

Further reading:

(Geertz)

(Ogden and Richards)

(Young)

(Young, Malinowski: Odyssey of an Anthropologist 1884-1920)