Taylor & Francis – Encyclopedia of Modernism



About you

[Salutation]

Sarah

Ann

Wells



[Enter your biography]



University of Notre Dame



Your article

de Morais Andrade, Mário Raul (1893-1945)

[Enter any variant forms of your headword – OPTIONAL]

Often called the pope of Brazilian Modernism, Mário de Andrade spearheaded several different phases of the movement, and is credited with introducing the term modernismo in Brazil. From pioneering the experimental first wave of Brazilian Modernism of 1922-26 to sombre reflections on national identity in the mid-1930s-1940s and moving among poetry, short fiction, essays, musicology, travel writing, and the novel Macunaíma (1928), his output is extraordinary in both its volume and its influence. Despite his shifting registers and genres, the major preoccupations of his works remain constant throughout his lengthy career: Brazilian national identity and fraught encounters between different cultures, ethnicities, and worldviews; linguistic experimentation, especially the relationship between writing and orality; and music. 

File: 1 Mario de Andrade by Anita Malfatti.jpg

Figure 1 Image of Mario de Andrade by Brazilian Modernist painter Anita Malfatti.

	Often called the pope of Brazilian Modernism, Mário de Andrade spearheaded several different phases of the movement, and is credited with introducing the term modernismo in Brazil. From pioneering the experimental first wave of Brazilian Modernism of 1922-26 to sombre reflections on national identity in the mid-1930s-1940s and moving among poetry, short fiction, essays, musicology, travel writing, and the novel Macunaíma (1928), his output is extraordinary in both its volume and its influence. Despite his shifting registers and genres, the major preoccupations of his works remain constant throughout his lengthy career: Brazilian national identity and fraught encounters between different cultures, ethnicities, and worldviews; linguistic experimentation, especially the relationship between writing and orality; and music.

File: 2 Mario de Andrade by Candido Portinari.jpg

Figure 2 Image of Mario de Andrade by Brazilian Modernist painter Candido Portinari. 

De Andrade’s two most famous works are a volume of experimental poetry and a novel. Paulecéia desvairada [Hallucinated City] was written at the dawn of the 1920s and published in 1922, its release coinciding with Brazil’s Modern Art Week. He was a central participant in this seminal event — his poem ‘Ode to the Bourgeois Gentleman’ apparently elicited scathing boos when recited — as well as in the central modernist journals Klaxon (1922-23) and Estética (1924-25). Hallucinated City was his second volume of poetry. The title suggests the poet’s delusional ‘hallucinations’ were spawned by his beloved city of São Paulo. During the time of its publication, São Paulo was Latin America’s fastest-growing metropolis, undergoing rapid changes including immigration, industrialization, and shifting gender roles. After reading Hallucinated City, Oswald de Andrade (1890-1954; no relation), enthusiastically heralded him in an entitled ‘O Meu Poeta Futurista’ (‘My Futurist Poet,’ 1921), an epithet he would approach warily. Yet, like Mário de Andrade’s other works from the 1920s, Hallucinated City is evidently in dialogue with European Modernist Movements, including Marinetti’s. Also influential were Jean Epstein, Blaise Cendrars, Hans Arp, Wassily Kandinski, Guiallame Apollinaire, Stéphane Mallarme, and Jean Cocteau. 

The earliest of Brazilian Modernist experimental poetry, Hallucinated City, for the most part, rejects the reigning poetic model, the nineteenth-century French movement Parnassianism, with its emphasis on meter, craftsmanship, art for art’s sake, and an orderly nature. In twenty-two free-verse poems, the fragmented and multiplied poetic voice explores a diverse and dynamic, but also cruel, urban space. São Paulo becomes a character, just as Manhattan, Berlin, or Buenos Aires will become in the contemporaneous genre of city films, or in works by John Dos Passos, Alfred Döblin, or Jorge Luis Borges. Streetcars, cinema, the popular press, wireless telegraphy, machines, Brazilian popular music, and snatches of urban dialogue jostle together with specific neighbourhoods and streets names. A keen interest in the everyday juts up against the residual romantic exploration of poetic subjectivity. Neologisms abound, including those that attempt to fashion a new language to mirror the city’s novel experiences, along with snatches of Italian, French, English and Spanish, reflecting the city’s immigrant and cosmopolitan makeup. Experimenting with parataxis and montage, he creates associative rather than thematic or causal links among images separated by frequent ellipses. The volume also contains several references, including the first of many references to the Harlequin, an important figure of Brazilian Modernism. A representation of performativity and multiplicity, the Harlequin is referenced in the cover of the first edition. 

File: 3 Paulicea Desvairada Cover 1st edition.jpg

Figure 3 The Cover of the 1st edition of Hallucinated City.

The ‘Prefacio Interessantísimo’ [‘Extremely Interesting Preface’], written after the book’s publication and, in some sense, a response to the polemic it launched, is itself of interest as a manifesto and ars poetica. In it, he pokes fun at the proliferation of ‘isms’ in the avant-garde period, but also implicitly yokes himself with that emergent tradition. He also draws analogies between his poetry and music, which was a major focus throughout his life. 

De Andrade’s other most important reflection on modern poetics can be found in ‘A Escrava que não é Isaura’ [‘The Slave-Girl Who Is Not Isaura’] (1925), a work that grapples with the role of the Orphic voice in the tension between tradition and modernity. 

His novel Macunaíma (1928) — subtitled The Hero with No Character — is his other great work of literature. He named it a ‘rhapsody,’ highlighting its musical construction, in which different elements are juxtaposed to achieve an underlying unity. A bawdy, encyclopedic epic, Macunaíma is both a critique and a celebration of Brazilian national identity. The eponymous hero, a trickster figure, is a black Brazilian born in the heart of the Amazon who embarks on a quest that covers multiple spaces and times in a kind of paratactic map of Brazil. In a sense, Macunaíma is a precursor of magical realism, with its nonchalant tone that interweaves the fantastic, mythic, and urban/modern without transitions; Macunaíma and those around him morph into different objects, animals, races, etc. The novel was influenced by anthropologist Sir James George Frazer’s The Golden Bough (1890), Sigmund Freud’s ‘Totem and Taboo’ (1913), and German anthropologist Theodor Koch-Grünberg’s research on Tupi tribes. Highly experimental, the novel interweaves myths and popular speech from a variety of different regions, as well as lexicon from African and Amazonian languages and French, Italian, and English. The book’s polyglot character combined with its lengthy, experimental catalogues of flora and fauna unique to the Amazon, have rendered it notoriously difficult to translate.

While the two were written independently of one another, the publication of Macunaíma coincided chronologically with another major milestone of Brazilian Modernism, Oswald de Andrade’s ‘Cannibal Manifesto,’ and were therefore linked retrospectively, inspiring experimental writers and musicians in the movements of the 1960s-70s that also sought to challenge deterministic interpretations of Brazil’s uneven modernisation and the legacy of colonialism. The director Joaquim Pedro de Andrade made a film version of Macunaíma in 1969. 

File: 4 Movie Poster Macunaima.jpg

Figure 4 Poster of the film version of Macunaima.

Other important works include Amar, verbo intransitivo [Love, an Intransitive Verb; translated as Fräulein] (1927), an erotic coming-of-age novel, experimental and Freudian, and Clã do Jabuti [Clan of the Jabuti] (1927), which consecrated his interest in indigenous, African, and regional Brazilian myths that were of great interest to Brazilian modernists more broadly. Like Love, an Intransitive Verb and Macunaíma, Clã do Jabuti is a search for and exploration of Brazilian language, rhythms (including samba music), and cultural patrimony. While deeply invested in the national project, in Brazilian customs and speech, de Andrade consistently undermined simplistic and essentialist understandings of Brazil, underlying its hybrid nature and its construction of it by European travellers. This questioning comes to the fore in his experimental travelogue, O turista aprendiz [The Tourist-Apprentice], which was written in 1927 and published posthumously; it recounts his trips to the Amazon and Brazilian backlands. 

Like many of his contemporaries, de Andrade grew progressively materialist and more explicitly concerned with social and political problems throughout the 1930s and 1940s, a shift he explores in the volume Aspectos da Literatura Brasileira, [Aspects of Brazilian Literature] (1943). In the mid-1930s he became the director of Department of Culture for the Municipality of São Paulo, and set about creating orchestras, libraries, and influencing national policy on artistic patrimony. In what was to be a lasting legacy in Brazilian cultural history, he was also instrumental in bringing Diana Dreyfuss and her husband Claude Levi-Strauss to Brazil; together they founded the Society of Ethnography and Folklore of São Paulo (Brazil’s first ethnographic research centre).

He also published several other volumes of poetry, three short story collections, and various works on music, dance, and visual art, including ‘A Música e a Canção Populares no Brasil’ [‘Music and Popular Song in Brazil’] (1936) and ‘A Expressão Musical nos Estados Unidos’ [‘Musical Expression in the United States’] (1940). 

Selected List of Works:

Poesias completas (1966), São Paulo, Martins 1966 (Portuguese)

Obra escogida: novela, cuento, ensayo, epistolario (1979). Souza, Gilda de Mello e.; Vergueiro, Laura de Campos., and others, eds, Caracas, Venezuela, Biblioteca Ayacucho. (Spanish)

Obra imatura (1960)., São Paulo, Martins. (Portuguese)

Contos novos (1972), São Paulo, Livraria Martins Editora (Portuguese)

Os contos de Belazarte (1972), São Paulo, Livraria Martins. (Portuguese)

O empalhador de passarinho (1972), São Paulo, Livraria Martins Editôra. (Portuguese)

Apectos da literatura brasileira (1943), Rio de Janeiro, Americ-edit. (Portuguese)

O banquete (1977), São Paulo: Livraria Duas Cidades. (Portuguese)

Amar, verbo intransitive: idílo (1972). São Paulo, Livraria Martins Editora (Portuguese) 

Ensaio sobre a música brasileira (1972), São Paulo, Livraria Martins Editora (Portuguese)

Aspectos da música brasileira (1991), Belo Horizonte: Villa Rica. (Portuguese)

O turista aprendiz (1976), São Paulo, Livraria Duas Cidades. (Portuguese)

Fräulein (1933), translated by Margaret Richardson Hollingsworth, New York, Macaulay Co. (English)

Macunaíma (1984). New York: Random House. (English)

Macunaíma, o heroi sem nenhum carácter (1996), Nanterre, France, ALLCA XX: Université Paris X. (Portuguese)

Hallucinated City/Paulicea Desvairada (1978). Translated by Jack E. Tomlins, Nashville, Vanderbilt University Press. (English)

Further reading:

 (Brotherston)



(Foster)



(Haberly)	



(João)



(Passos and Luiz)



(Perrone)



(Read)



(Rosenberg)



(Schelling)



(Unruh)