Taylor & Francis – Encyclopedia of Modernism



About you

[Salutation]

Matthew

[Middle name]

Chambers



[Enter your biography]



University of Lodz



Your article

Mass Observation

[Enter any variant forms of your headword – OPTIONAL]

Mass Observation was a movement founded in 1937 dedicated to studying the habits of everyday life in Britain. The movement’s methodology quickly evolved from a Surrealist-inspired experiment into a more scientifically-orthodox project that was pursued on a wide-scale until 1949.



Mass Observation was founded in 1937 by filmmaker Humphrey Jennings, poet Charles Madge, and ethnologist and explorer Tom Harrisson. It was originally conceived as a project to capture the dominant image of the day by collecting reports and observing people’s behaviour. The group was influenced by filmic montage, André Breton’s writing on coincidence and the Surrealist image, and Bronislaw Malinowski’s theories of ‘participatory observation’ in anthropology.

Mass Observation was a movement founded in 1937 dedicated to studying the habits of everyday life in Britain. The movement’s methodology quickly evolved from a Surrealist-inspired experiment into a more scientifically-orthodox project that was pursued on a wide-scale until 1949.



Mass Observation was founded in 1937 by filmmaker Humphrey Jennings, poet Charles Madge, and ethnologist and explorer Tom Harrisson. It was originally conceived as a project to capture the dominant image of the day by collecting reports and observing people’s behaviour. The group was influenced by filmic montage, André Breton’s writing on coincidence and the Surrealist image, and Bronislaw Malinowski’s theories of ‘participatory observation’ in anthropology. 



The group’s interdisciplinary and experimental approach produced the collaboratively written ‘Oxford Collective Poem’ and May the Twelfth (1937), an expansive collection of observations and reports from all over Britain of people’s thoughts, activities, and even dreams during George VI’s coronation. Mass Observation moved towards a more orthodox anthropological approach to their methods following May the Twelfth, which was signalled by Malinowski’s essay in First Year’s Work that called for more scientific rigour in the group’s methods. This was followed in 1939 by Britain by Mass-Observation, in which Madge and Harrisson made some effort to analyse the data they had collected on various habits, including how people rolled their cigarettes. In 1940, Mass Observation was hired by the Ministry of Information to supply data to help shape propaganda in order to boost public morale. Jennings had left the group after May the Twelfth, and Madge followed in 1940 due to increasing disputes between himself and Harrisson. Harrisson was called up in late 1943 and served the remainder of the war in Borneo. By the late 1940s, none of the founders of Mass Observation had any direct involvement in any activities, and in 1949 it became Mass Observation Ltd., invested solely in commercial market research.



Mass Observation had three distinct periods: an early interdisciplinary period that can be related to Jennings’s involvement; a further period when following Jennings’s departure and Malinowski’s essay in First Year’s Work, Mass Observation pursued a more orthodox scientific approach; and a final stage which saw its collaboration with the MOI and eventual transformation into a market research firm. The group’s early experiments provocatively point to a direction they ultimately did not pursue: the ‘Oxford Collective Poem’, with its 3 pages of instructions for composition anticipates later procedural work by John Cage and Jackson Mac Low, and May the Twelfth is a loose assemblage of quotations and reports with very occasional commentary, which bears a certain structural similarity to Walter Benjamin’s Arcades Project. Mass Observation’s domestic field research indirectly influenced Richard Hoggart’s The Uses of Literacy (1957) and later the Centre for Contemporary Cultural Studies at the University of Birmingham’s ethnographic methods. The Mass Observation archive is currently held at the Special Collections Library at the University of Sussex.



List of Works

May the Twelfth (1937)

First Year’s Work (1938)

Britain by Mass-Observation (1939)

The Pub and the People (1943)



Online Resources

Mass Observation Archive at the Special Collections Library at the University of Sussex

Further reading:

 (Sheridan)

(Hubble)