
Chara Kolokytha

Matisse, Henri [Emile Benot] (1869-1954)

Henri Matisse is a key figure in French modernism and is considered to be
the most influential colourist of twentieth-century art. A French painter,
sculptor, and printmaker, Matisse studied painting in Paris at the cole
des Beaux Arts under Gustave Moreau, the cole des Arts Dcoratifs and the
Acadmie Julian under W.A. Bouguereau. Matisses early paintings
demonstrate a dark, sombre, and dull palette and a naturalist approach to
his selected themes (La liseuse, 1894). This progressively gave way to more
vivid pure colours (Still Life with Oranges, 1899; Acadmie bleue, 1899-
1900) and impressionist execution (Study of a Nude, 1899). In 1903, Matisse
began to use intense pure colours, marking a break with both naturalist and
impressionist traditions (Portrait dAndr Derain, 1905). He inaugurated a
new style that contemporary critics named Fauvism (Le Bonheur de vivre,
1905-6). From the early 1920s, Matisse enjoyed a worldwide reputation,
being famous both for his masterfully coloured compositions and for the
joyful atmosphere of his works, which became the hallmark of his overall
artistic production. Works by Matisse can be found in most museums of
modern art around the world in addition to primary displays at the Museum
Matisse in Nice and in his birthplace, Le Cateau Cambrsis.

Painting

The influence of Paul Czanne is evident in the artists early work and, in
particular, through his conception of space, light and form. Persian
miniatures and Japanese prints influenced Matisse, and he studied African
art with great interest (see, for example, Nu debut, 1907) at the end of
the first decade of the century. His interior spaces (Harmony in Red, 1908)
and painted odalisques (Reclining Odalisque, 1926) owe much to his
admiration for the Asian art and textiles then exerting considerable
influence over Eurpoean decorative artists. Matisses art also has
Symbolist overtones (La Danse, 1910) implying the influence of his tutor,
Gustave Moreau.

In the mid-1930s, the artist attempted to simplify his technique;
subsequently, he introduced the so-called paper cut-outs (papiers
dcoups), which he used in order to replace the drawing on the coloured
surfaces of his works, resulting in a collage-like composition. In
collaboration with the Parisian art critic and editor, Triade (Stratis
Eleftheriades), he perfected this technique facilitating the reproduction
of these works in several luxurious livres dartistes (artists books)
published after the end of the Second World War. The most representative
illustrated book of Matisses mature style is Jazz (1947), edited by
Triade, which reproduces about one hundred colour prints.

Sculpture

Matisses sculptural work, enumerating approximately eighty pieces, is
considerably overshadowed by his paintings, but played an important role in
the shaping of his painterly style. The artist admitted that he sculpted as
a painter and used this medium to better understand pictorial problems
during the creative process. Matisse created over half of his sculptural
works from 1900 to 1909. Subsequently, his production became intermittent.
His interest in sculpture is evident in his relatively late decision to
attend courses at the Ecole communale de la ville de Paris, producing a
copy after the cast of Jaguar Devouring a Hare (1899-1901) by Antoine-Louis
Barye. This piece was Matisses first and only work that treated a violent
and bestial scene characterised by strenuous movement. Although denying
Rodins immediate influence on his work, the artist purchased a Rodin
plaster bust as early as 1899. Matisse also hired an aged female model that
formerly posed for Rodin to pose for The Serf (1900-3).

The spiralling rhythm of Madeleine I and II (1901 and 1903) reveals his
admiration for the arabesque. Despite his interest in primitive art 
African carvings in particular  Matisse linked his sculptural production
to the Renaissance tradition. The artist, however, differentiated his style
from that of Aristide Maillol since he was no longer concerned with the
volume of his creations, a fact that is also evident in his paintings.
Unlike Rodin, he avoided loading his works with literary connotations. Most
of Matisses sculptures, in principle, lack the element of narration as
well as the sense of movement.

Matisses casts demonstrate the use of ancient techniques such as sand
moulding and lost wax casting. Following his painting style, the artists
sculptural forms were considerably simplified after 1916. The most
transparent demonstration of his evolution in style is to be traced in the
Back (I-IV) plaster reliefs elaborated between 1909 and 1930. This
monumental scale series was subsequently cast in bronze, showing the back
view of a woman concealing her face. Matisses interest in relief sculpture
is a demonstration of his treatment of sculpture from a painters
perspective.

Graphic Work

Matisse produced an important number of prints and drawings throughout his
career. Most of them constitute commissioned works by several publishers
(Skira, Triade, Maeght) and were used to illustrate a series of
collectors books. His most important book illustrations are mostly for
works of poetry, including Les Jockeys Camoufls by Pierre Reverdy
(drawings, 1918), the Posies by Stphane Mallarm (etchings, 1932), James
Joyces Ulysses (engravings, 1935), the Lettres religieuses portugaises de
Mariana Alcoforado (lithographs, 1946), Charles Baudelaires Les Fleurs du
Mal (xylographs, etchings, photo-lithographs, 1947), and Pomes de Charles
dOrlans (colour lithographs, 1950).

Decorative - Monumental Work

Matisses  earliest  large-scale  commissions  include  the  two  decorative
panels, The Dance [La Danse] and Music, that he elaborated in 1909-1910  for
the Russian collector Sergei Shchukin. In the early 1930s,  the  artist  was
commissioned by the American collector Albert  Barnes  to  create  a  second
version of The Dance as a  mural  placed  above  the  windows  of  the  main
gallery of the Barnes Foundation in Merion. Later  in  his  life,  the  most
important decorative projects  that  he  undertook  include  his  monumental
works for the decoration of the interior of  the  Dominican  Chapel  of  the
Rosary in Venice, elaborated between 1948 and 1951. The same  year,  Matisse
produced a number of works for the decoration of the villa  Natasha  (Saint-
Jean-Cap-Ferrat), belonging  to  Triade    notably  Les  Poissons  chinois
(stained glass, 1951) and Le Platane (mural, 1952).


Illustrations
[pic]

Le Bonheur de vivre (The  Joy  of  life),  oil  on  canvas,  1905-6,  Barnes
Foundation, Merion. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Bonheur_Matisse.jpg

[pic]

Henri Matisse,  LAvaleur  de  sabres,  1943-44,  print  from  Jazz,  Paris,
Triade, 1947.

Useful Links

Official site of the Museum Matisse, Nice:
http://www.musee-matisse-nice.org/
Official site of the Museum Matisse, Le Cateau Cambrsis:
http://museematisse.cg59.fr/fr/Accueil/tabid/40/Default.aspx


Films

Henri Matisse (1946) documentary, directed by Francois Campaux (French)
Henri Matisse ou le talent  du  Bonheur,  (1960)  documentary,  directed  by
Marcel Ophuls (French)
Henri Matisse dans le midi  (1996)  Omega  films,  directed  by  Charles  de
Lartique (French)


References and further reading

Barr, A. H. (1951) Matisse: his Art and his Public, New York, The Museum  of
Modern Art.

Duthuit, C., Duthuit-Matisse M. (1983) Henri Matisse: Catalogue raisonn  de
luvre grav, Paris, C. Duthuit Editeur.

Flam, J. (1993) Matisse: The Dance, Washington, National Gallery of Art.

Flam, J. (1996) Matisse on Art, Berkeley, University of California Press.

Weiss Bock, C. C. (1996) Henri Matisse: A Guide to Research, London and  New
York, Routledge.

Szymusiak, D., Di Crescenzo C. (1997) Matisse et Triade,  exh.  cat.  Muse
Matisse, Le Cateau Cambrsis, Anthse.

OBrian, J. (1999) Ruthless Hedonism: The  American  Reception  of  Matisse,
University of Chicago Press.

Kosinski, D.M., Fisher J.M., Nash, A. (2007) Matisse: Painter  as  Sculptor,
Yale University Press.

Henri Matisse: notes dun peintre (2012) exh. cat. Paris, Centre Pompidou.

Rabinow, R., Aagesen,  D.  (2012)  Matisse:  In  search  of  true  painting,
exh.cat. New York, Metropolitan Museum of Art.

Cronan, T. (2013) Against Affective Formalism: Matisse, Bergson,  Modernism,
University of Minnesota Press.

McBreen, E. (2013) Matisses sculpture: the pinup  and  the  primitive,  New
Haven, Yale University Press.
