

[pic]


Hans Mattis-Teutsch, Composition, 1925, 136/125 cm, oil  on  cardboard,  The
Museum of Visual Arts, Galati, Romania





Mattis-Teutsch, Hans (1884-1960)


Hans Mattis-Teutsch was  a  Romanian  artist,  born  to  a  German-Hungarian
family in Braov where he also died. Exemplary for  the  tortuous  modernity
in (Central) Europe, he moved like a  missionary  from  peripheries  to  the
centre(s), then back again to periphery, and  from  traditional  realism  to
Jugendstil,  Post-Impressionism,  Expressionism,  constructive  Abstraction,
Art Deco, then back again to realism. His  stay  in  Paris  in  1905-08  was
decisive for his choice of painting, which was  influenced  by  the  Fauves,
the polychrome sculptures of Paul Gauguin, and  Cubo-Futurism  but  also  by
the works of Constantin Brancusi, Frantiek Kupka, and the Expressionism  of
Der Blaue Reiter.  His  stay  in  Berlin,  in  1918,  was  crucial  for  his
affiliation with Der Sturm. The 99th Sturm exhibition in 1921  featured  him
and Paul Klee. Like other contemporaries, Mattis-Teutsch extracted  stylish-
spiritual, cosmic-theosophical  visions  from  fantasised  landscapes,  then
projected innermost psychic workings onto  canvases,  turned  into  EEG-like
condition  reports.  He   later   erected   functional-decorative,   ideally
rational, humanistic edifices based on Socialist utopias, only to end  in  a
ghastly variety of Socialist Realism. Mattis-Teutsch was a keystone  of  the
Romanian, Hungarian and German avant-garde. Though  cosmopolitan,  he  lived
mostly in his Transylvanian hometown Braov, exhibiting locally and  working
as a  professor  at  the  art  college,  nourishing  a  modern,  progressive
provincial  art-life.  In  1946,  he  founded   the   first   syndicate   of
democratic artists in Romania.

Mattis-Teutsch started his artistic career learning woodwork in Braov, he
then went to Budapest in 1901, and continued with sculpture studies in
Munich in 1903. In 1917, Mattis-Teutsch entered the Budapest-avant-garde
circles; his linocut album was first issued by the journal MA. Lajos Kassak
introduced him to Herwarth Walden. He also collaborated with the a-z
group in Cologne and the Bauhaus. Mattis-Teutschs Abstract & Expressionist
cycle of the 1920s, Seelenblumen (Soulflowers) is a Kandinsky-cum-Marc-like
series of buds-patterned figures turned into potent, colourful devices
rendering the spiritual, dynamic fusion of natural entities into the
painterly mass, losing their descriptive particularities as humans, trees
or skies into a purely abstract, rhythmic pulsation, the musical
Expressionism sought by the artist: My aim is, by means of painting and
sculpture, to create abstract works which can achieve through art a life of
their own, one that reflects the states and conditions of the soul.

In Budapest during the Hungarian Soviet  Republic,  Mattis-Teutsch  was  not
involved in the political turmoil, but returned to Braov. In  1920  he  had
his first solo show in Bucharest.  His  progression  from  Expressionism  to
Constructivism, around  1923-24,  coincided  with  his  affiliation  to  the
Bucharest  avant-garde.  He  participated   in   the   First   International
Exhibition of the journal Contimporanul in 1924, then became  a  contributor
and editor of the Constructivist  journal  Integral  and  professor  at  the
Academy of  Decorative  Arts  in  Bucharest  (a  Bauhaus-like  institution).
Sharing  M.H.  Maxys  interests  in  social  art   and   the   synthetic
(integral) human being, Mattis-Teutsch re-introduced, around  1927,  human
shapes in his works and developed a constructive Realism. This  Socialist-
inspired art-system (in art-practice and theory), backed by his  1931  book,
Kunstideologie, which shows the turn from passive to active art, focused  on
art as order and activism and on the shaping of the  New  Man.  I  search
for a new human type, with no physiognomy; I depict no  story,  no  history,
no memory, just the human being as  such  he  said.  From  1933  until  the
1940s, Mattis-Teutsch ceased to work, but  expressed  criticism  of  Nazism.
After 1945 he engaged in  the  social  and  political  organisation  of  the
artists, yet he became a misfit because  of  the  criticism  from  Communist
officials, who accused him of modernist formalism.  Trying  to  adapt  to
Socialist Realism, he resorted to  Surrealist-like,  figurative  portraiture
in pale, blurred  and  wistful  settings  of  propaganda  subjects  such  as
workers, peasants, intellectuals, and Stalin.


Readings:

Hans Mattis-Teutsch, Kunstideologie, Stbilitt und Aktivitt in  Kunstwerk,
 Bauhausbcher, Potsdam: Mller & J. Kiepenheuer, 1931.

Hans Mattis-Teutsch und Der Blaue Reiter, exh. cat. Mnchen. Haus der
Kunst, 2001.

Eva Forgacs et al., Janos Mattis Teutsch and the Hungarian avant-garde,
West Hollywood, CA: Louis Stern Fine Arts; Budapest: Mission Art, 2002.

Zoltan Banner, Hans Mattis-Teutsch, Bucharest: Kriterion 1974.
