
Meadmore, Clement (1929- 1995)

Clement Meadmore was a major twentieth century sculptor with many works in
situ across North America, Australia and Japan, often commissioned as
design features within substantial architectural installations and urban
design projects in the International Style. Their heroic and rhetorical
positioning on the forecourts of large corporate towers or in plazas on
university campuses and other public institutions could almost be
classified as a clich of mid to late twentieth century visual experience,
except that his works captured attention on their own merits for their
impeccable fluid grace and balance, hovering between a celebration of the
structural robustness of steel and a denial of their very materiality.
Outlasting the trends in civic landscaping that begot the commissions,
Meadmores sculptures have frequently been exempt from the popular
abhorrence of abstract sculpture. Classifying the sculptures as minimalist
overlooks Meadmores key working processes. As his work developed through
improvisation and intuitively by trial and error through slow and
painstaking visual readjustment of elements in small-scale models, it was
never the physical realisation of a preconceived idea that was well
established before the work was constructed.

Meadmore studied aeronautical engineering but then transferred to the first
Australian industrial design course established at RMIT. His commercial
works included furniture, lighting and interiors. Although he later
emphasised 1950s Australias uncongenial provincialism and his overriding
need to escape, his metal furniture was highly acclaimed. This early
success indicates both the international outlook of design customers in
Australia and his grasp of the interplay between structure, lightness and
balance, which defined his mature work.

When Meadmore arrived in the United States in 1963, he worked on maquettes,
befriended artists and viewed exhibitions while taking two years to find a
dealer. He removed the heavy textural encrustation of his early work, which
he now regarded as an affectation, and started working with smooth
surfaces. Many of his works feature a squared off pipelike form imbued with
a reptilian flexibility. The positioning of the cubed end pieces with as
much care as balancing and shaping the main curved lines, augmented
compositional variety. Black was his preferred colour for its tonal
consistency, whereas white absorbed various hues and interfered with the
clear reading of the form.

              [pic]

Clement Meadmore, Hob Nob, 2007 (1992), aluminium, University of Michigan.

Internationally Meadmore ranks as the most frequently commissioned white
Australian artist, with only another earlier sculptor, Sir Bertram
Mackennal, sharing a similar international profile. Meadmores sculptures
bear no signs of his Australian origins unlike painters Arthur Boyd or
Sidney Nolan who traded substantially on the romantic and exotic Otherness
of Australia. Meadmore regarded such regionalism as worthless and the
substantiating influences on his practice were international. Mondrians
writings were a crucial guide in the late 1940s and early 1950s. An outdoor
sculpture exhibition at Antwerp he saw in 1953 confirmed his self-
positioning as a sculptor. While viewing contemporary American painting in
Japan 1959 confirmed his belief that he needed to work in the United
States. In 1976 he became an American citizen. This choice did not simply
enable easy contact with dealers, clients and expert fabricators; for him
North America embodied much of what he found congenial, including his life
in urban New York and his legendary love of jazz and even the relentless,
rigorous, self-guided meritocracy that shaped his artworks.








References and Further Reading

Fox, M. (2005) Clement Meadmore, Sculptor in Metal, Is Dead at 76,
Obituary in the New York Times (viewed online April 2014)
http://www.nytimes.com/2005/04/21/arts/design/21meadmore.html?_r=0

Gibson, E. (1994) The sculpture of Clement Meadmore, New York: Hudson Hills
Press.
(A lavishly illustrated monograph of the artists work over the first three
decades of his working life in the USA)

de Groen, G. (1984) Some other dream: the artist, the artworld & the
expatriate : conversations with Janet Alderson, Robert Hughes, Max
Hutchinson, Robert Jacks, Bruce Latimer, Clement Meadmore, Jeffrey Smart,
Stelarc, John Stringer, Sydney: Hale & Iremonger.
(Clement Meadmores interview with de Groen is the most extensive published
self-narrative by the sculptor, covering his intentions and motivations,
although it presents a subjective and emotionally distorted vision of his
Australian origins)

Meadmore, C. (1974) The modern chair: classics in production. London:
Studio Vista.
(Meadmores elegant and economical prose not only outlines a history of
significant designer chairs from the mid-nineteenth century onwards, but
offers an insight into his approach to form and materials. He presented the
concept of a history of classic chairs about three decades before it became
a clich of design literature)




http://www.meadmore.com/ - online resource of Meadmores estate  includes
a comprehensive listing of holdings in public collections and many images
of works.

