
Cunningham, Merce (b. Mercier Phillip Cunningham, 16 April 1919, Centralia,
Washington; d. 26 July, 2009, New York City, U.S.A.) Cunningham, Merce (b.
Mercier Phillip Cunningham, 16 April 1919, Centralia, Washington; d. 26
July, 2009, New York City, U.S.A.)


Summary
One of the twentieth centurys most influential dancers and choreographers,
Merce Cunningham re-defined the genre of modern dance. He began his
professional career as a member of the Martha Graham Company in 1939.
However, by 1953, when he founded his own company, he had repudiated many
of the prevailing beliefs and practices of previous modern dance pioneers.
Prior to Cunningham, most modern dance choreographers (including Graham)
vehemently rejected the fundamentals of classical ballet. Cunningham, by
contrast, re-incorporated ballets emphasis on classical shape, line,
elevation and intricate footwork. He offset these balletic elements with
eccentric tilts and twists of the torso, back and arms. In the early 1950s,
in collaboration with the composer John Cage, Cunningham also pioneered the
use of chance methodologies as a choreographic tool. Together, Cunningham
and Cage fundamentally re-conceived the relationship between movement and
music which had characterised virtually all earlier genres of choreography.
In Cunninghams dances, movement, sound and dcor all remained independent
of one another. Yet the underlying concept of collaboration remained
fundamental to Cunninghams dances, with celebrated composers and visual
artists creating sound scores and designs for the company. Over the course
of a career that spanned more than sixty years, Cunningham choreographed
over 200 dances including Root of an Unfocus (1944), Sixteen Dances For
Soloist and Company of Three (1951) Septet (1953), Suite for Five in Space
and Time (1956), Summerspace (1958) Rune (1959), Winterbranch (1964),
Variations V (1965) Walkaround Time (1968), Rainforest (1968), Sounddance
(1975), Torse (1976), Quartet (1982), Fabrications (1987), CRWDSPCR (l993)
and BIPED (1999).

Training and Early Career
Merce Cunningham was born Mercier Philip Cunningham in Centralia,
Washington, in 1919. As an adolescent, he studied tap, soft shoe and
exhibition ballroom dancing. In the fall of 1937, Cunningham enrolled at
the Cornish School in Seattle, where he studied Martha Graham technique
with Bonnie Bird, a former member of Grahams company. In 1938, Bird hired
John Cage as her musical accompanist for both technique and composition
classes. Cunninghams life-long friendship (and eventual partnership) with
Cage began later that year. Under the tutelage of Bird and Cage, Cunningham
began to choreograph short solos, duets and trios as classroom exercises.
During the summer of 1939, Cunningham served as Birds teaching assistant
at Mills College in Oakland, California. Many of the principal pioneers of
modern dance in America  Martha Graham, Doris Humphrey, Charles Weidman
and Jos Limn  were in residence at Mills that summer. After seeing
Cunningham perform in a number of works, Graham was so impressed that she
immediately asked him to join her company.

Cunningham eagerly accepted her invitation. He re-located to New York City
in the fall of 1939 and performed as a featured dancer with Graham until
1945. Over the course of those six years, Cunningham originated a number of
seminal roles in the Graham repertoire, including the acrobat in Every Soul
is a Circus, (1939), the Christ figure in El Penitente, March in Letter to
the World (both 1940), the Poetic Beloved in Deaths and Entrances (1943)
and the Revivalist in Appalachian Spring (1944).
During his final two years with Graham, Cunningham, in collaboration with
Cage, began to choreograph (and publicly perform) his own dances.
Cunningham and Cages first joint concert took place in New York City in
April 1944. The programme included six solos Cunningham had choreographed
for himself (all accompanied by Cages music), interspersed with three
additional musical works by Cage. One of Cunninghams solos, Root of an
Unfocus, was structured entirely in terms of what Cage described as time-
length. It was divided into three sections of varying duration. The only
intentional connection between the music and the movement was a pre-
determined point of correspondence at the beginning and end of each
section. Cage later observed: [W]e were getting free of this business of
fitting one thing to another. I had long had that idea of letting the two
arts collaborate without following one another, but it was with Root of an
Unfocus that we finally made some kind of progress.[1] Cunningham would
subsequently note: I date my beginning from this concert.[2]

Major Contributions to the Field and to Modernism
The relative autonomy of movement and sound in this early Cunningham/Cage
collaboration is especially revealing when examined in historical context.
A few months later, in October 1944, Cunningham appeared in the premiere of
Grahams Appalachian Spring, a work that has come to exemplify the tight
fit between collaborative elements that Cunningham and Cage had already
renounced. Indeed, the seamless way in which Grahams choreography, Aaron
Coplands music and Isamu Noguchis setting blended into a singular
artistic whole has become a legendary example of what  most choreographers
mean when they speak of collaboration.

By 1953, the year that Cunningham (again, in collaboration with Cage)
founded his own dance company, he had radically re-defined what it means
for choreographers, composers and designers to collaborate with one
another. The movement choreographed by Cunningham, the sound scores
composed by Cage and the dcor designed by visual artists such as Robert
Rauschenberg, Jasper Johns, and Andy Warhol were all conceived and executed
in mutual isolation. They encountered one another for the very first time
at dress rehearsal or on opening night.  Not since the Diaghilev era had so
many renowned composers and visual artists created work for a dance
company.  However, unlike the early collaborations encouraged by Diaghilev
(which often aspired to the Wagnerian goal of Gesamtkunstwerk or artistic
synthesis), Cunningham and Cages works had antecedents in Dadaist and
Surrealist performance of the 1920s, an era that both artists claimed as
part of their modernist heritage.  The composer Erik Satie (whose 'Trois
Morceaux en Forme de Poire' was used in Septet ) belonged to that pantheon
as did the visual artist Marcel Duchamp.  Indeed, the movable plastic boxes
designed by Jasper Johns for Walkaround Time (1968), paid tribute to
Duchamp and his seminal work The Large Glass.

In contrast to the hot, supercharged emotions of Grahams dances in the
late 1940s and early 1950s, the basic look and feel of Cunninghams
choreography was cool, reserved and elegantly detached, closer in fact to
the style associated with George Balanchine.  Its lightning-fast footwork,
balletic uprightness and classically articulated shape placed a higher
premium on the visual pleasures of formal complexity than on the kinetic,
dramatic or expressive power of convulsive muscular contractions. In
Grahams dances, Cunningham had always portrayed a character (e.g. the
Revivalist in Appalachian Spring). But in his own choreography, Cunningham
never conceived of himself  or any of his dancers  as characters
possessing behavioural histories or psychological motivations.  Their
presence on stage only signified the non-fictional reality of a body moving
in space and time.

Before Cunningham, modern dance was virtually synonymous with choreographic
self-expression. Indeed, the high premium placed on personal expressiveness
was widely regarded as the essential distinction between modern dance and
its presumed historical adversary: classical ballet. Cunningham, by
contrast, openly admired the purely formal and sculptural beauty of ballet.
Even while performing with the Graham company, he regularly took class at
the School of American Ballet, the training ground for George Balanchines
dancers. In seminal works such as Septet (1953), Suite for Five in Space
and Time (1956), Summerspace (1958) and Rune (1959), Cunningham became the
first modern dance choreographer to combine the upright carriage, elegant
line and razor sharp footwork of ballet with the curvaceous flexibility of
back, torso and pelvis associated with modern dance  elements that formed
the basis of what is now known as Cunningham technique.  He was also
attracted to ballets relative impersonality:  the fact that ballet
choreographers begin the dance-making process with a lexicon of existing
steps and postures, which, by definition, are not unique to their own
bodies or idiosyncratic ways of moving.

Prophetically, in 1944 Cage published a short essay about the state of
contemporary dance in America. In it, he argued that
      Personality is such a flimsy thing on which to build an art...And the
      ballet is obviously not built on such an ephemeron, for, if it were,
      it would not at present thrive as it does...That the ballet has
      something seems reasonable to assume. That what it has is what the
      modern dance needs is here expressed as an opinion.[3]

The principal problem  with modern dance, suggests Cage, is that it
      was not impersonal , but was intimately connected with and ultimately
      dependent on the personalities and even the actual physical bodies of
      the individuals who imparted it.[4]

Cage and Cunninghams campaign on behalf of greater impersonality in
dance was part and parcel of their growing interest in Zen Buddhism, which
they discovered in the late 1940s. Zen asks its practitioners to transcend
(or at least de-emphasise) their personal desires, their innate likes and
dislikes, including their most deeply held aesthetic preferences. For Cage,
chance methodologies  rolling dice, tossing coins, picking cards at random
or consulting the I Ching)  became the most practical way of achieving
this goal. Cunningham followed suit, and beginning with Sixteen Dances
(1951), he began to employ chance operations as a means of making
choreographic decisions about the order  in which steps were combined into
phrases, the tempo at which they were performed, the number of dancers
performing each phrase, the on-stage location of each dancer, etc. This
quest for greater impersonality became central to Cunninghams
choreography. If one's concern is self-expression, he once remarked,
then the proper area is psychoanalysis.[5]  In other words, artists
should reserve their most intimate confessions for the analysts couch.

Like modernists of the 1920s, who incorporated new industrial materials and
technologies such as film into ballet performances, Cunningham
enthusiastically embraced advanced technologies including electronic tape
splicing, video synthesizers, FM telemetry, radar and ultrasound as well as
digital processes such as motion capture. As early as 1965, for a dance
titled Variations V, Cunningham and Cage commissioned Robert Moog to design
a set of twelve antennas, each of which generated an electromagnetic field
with a radius of four feet.  Whenever a dancer traversed one of these
fields, his or her movement triggered the sounds that constituted the
works musical score. In addition, the pioneering video artist Nam June
Paik and the experimental filmmaker Stan Vanderbeek both created streams of
moving imagery for Variations V that often turned the dancers unitards
into projection screens. Moreover, beginning in the 1970s, Cunningham
frequently collaborated with prominent videographers and filmmakers. Over
the course of the next three decades, Cunningham, James Atlas and Elliot
Caplan created many pioneering works of dance for screen:  Fractions
(1977), Points in Space (1987) and Beach Birds For Camera (1991).  Finally,
in 1989, at the age of seventy, Cunningham began experimenting with
LifeForms (subsequently re-named DanceForms) a digital animation programme
which represents the dancers body as a series of concentric circles.
Seated at a computer, Cunningham was able to both dictate and notate a wide
variety of choreographic variables. Beginning with Trackers (l991),
Cunningham became the first major choreographer routinely to utilise the
computer as a choreographic tool.

Cunninghams emergence as an influential choreographer in the 1950s and
1960s coincided almost exactly with the formulation of one of the twentieth
centurys most influential conceptions of aesthetic modernism: art critic
Clement Greenbergs theory of modernist purity, which received its
definitive formulation in his 1965 essay Modernist Painting. For
Greenberg, all genuinely modernist art is only about itself, its true
subject being the underlying nature of the medium in which it was
created. His theory, a refinement of older conceptions of art for arts
sake and aesthetic formalism, both of which emphasized abstract purity of
form over representational content, sat easily with Cunningham, who did not
attempt to represent anything beyond the medium of the dancers body.

Cunningham is thus unique among modern dance choreographers in the extent
to which he divested human movement of its potential for representing
character, conveying psychological motivation or telling stories. This is
yet another consequence of the chance-dictated processes that Cage first
referred to as getting rid of the glue.  In a 1954 essay published in
Dance Observer, Cunningham wrote about the use of chance as a method of
finding continuity, that is, continuity thought of as being the continuum
of one thing after another, rather than being related by psychological or
thematic or other cause-and-effect devices.[6]  By severing the underlying
relationships between cause and effect, Cunningham eliminated the
psychological foundation upon which choreographers like Graham had
constructed both character and narrative in their dances. Indeed, this new
emphasis on each and every movement as a self-contained entity (what
Cunningham called each single instant as it comes along) precluded the
narrative trajectory of exposition, rising action, climax and denouement
which were clearly visible in Grahams best known dances. As Andr Malraux
once wrote, The distinguishing feature of modern art is that it never
tells a story.[7]  But in response to the accusation that his non-
narrative choreography fails to imbue movement with meaning, Cunningham
made the following statement in his own defence:  If one thinks of dance
as an errand to accomplish, as a message to be sent, then one misses the
spring along the way.[8]

Legacy
By rejecting the anti-ballet bias (as well as the emphasis on self-
expression and representation) which had dominated American modern dance
from the time of Isadora Duncan through the heyday of Martha Graham, Merce
Cunningham radically altered the course of modern dance in the second half
of the twentieth century. Along with Paul Taylor, he pioneered the
rapprochement between ballet and modern that characterizes so much of
todays contemporary dance.  His radical ideas about the autonomy of
movement and music proved equally influential, helping to establish new
models for the collaboration of choreographers, composers and visual
artists.  Similarly, Cunningham and Cages ideas about chance as a
compositional tool has radically affected the way choreography is both
practised and taught. Finally, Cunningham developed a highly respected
technique.

Cunningham, with Cage, was the single most important influence on the next
generation of choreographic innovators, especially those associated with
the Judson Dance Theatre. Many had performed in his company, and their work
frequently incorporated chance operations, the dissociation of movement and
sound as well as a factual (emotionally neutral) style of performance,
all closely associated with Cunningham.  However, notable differences exist
between mentor and progeny. Cunningham rarely embraced pedestrian movement
and never utilized untrained performers in his work.  Like Graham and
Balanchine, he remained faithful to a dance lexicon and their implicit
belief in the value of virtuosic, corporeal skill.  Spoken text figured
only occasionally in his works. And despite his commitment to chance
operations as a choreographic tool, there was little or no improvisation in
the resulting performances.  Another key difference between Cunningham and
many of his postmodern followers is that his treatment of gender, as
evidenced in his partnering, remained relatively conventional.  Finally, he
never abjured the idea of dance as a difficult and demanding form of high
art.

List of Works
The Merce Cunningham Trust maintains the most comprehensive listing to date
of Cunninghams dances. The list is organised chronologically, beginning
with the earliest dances known to have been choreographed by Cunningham and
continuing through his final work created just a few months before his
death. This catalogue of titles can be accessed on-line at
http://www.mercecunningham.org/choreography

References and Further Reading
Brown, C. (2007) Chance and Circumstance: Twenty Years With Cage and
Cunningham, New York:  Knopf. (A beautifully written memoir by one of the
founding members of the Cunningham company)

Cage, J. (1987) A Year from Monday/New Lectures and Writings, Middletown
CT: Wesleyan University Press. (A good introduction to Cages evolving
ideas about the relationship between art and social change.)

-----  (1961) Silence/Lectures and Writings, Middletown CT: Wesleyan
University Press. (The earliest and arguably most influential collection of
Cages short essays)

Copeland, R. (2004) Merce Cunningham: The Modernizing of Modern Dance, New
York/London: Routledge. (Compares and contrasts Cunninghams repudiation of
the Graham aesthetic with Robert Rauschenberg and Jasper Johns repudiation
of the abstract expressionist aesthetic in painting)

Cohen, S. J. (1968) Time to Walk in Space, Dance Perspectives 34
(Summer).  (With contributions by John Cage, Clive Barnes, Edwin Denby,
Jill Johnston, Arlene Croce, Carolyn Brown, David Vaughan and Merce
Cunningham, this volume was one of the earliest attempts to assemble a wide
array of perspectives on Cunninghams work.)

Croce, A. (1977) Afterimages New York: Knopf.  (Croce, the longtime dance
critic of The New Yorker, offers some of the most insightful journalistic
criticism ever written about Cunningham, including accounts of seminal
Cunningham dances such as Loops, Signals, Canfield, Sounddance and
Walkaround Time.)

----- (1982) Going to the Dance, New York: Knopf.

----- (1987) Sight Lines, New York: Knopf.

Cunningham, M. (1968) Changes/Notes on Choreography, edited by Frances
Starr, New York: Something Else Press. (Cunninghams notes, sketches and
musings offer an invaluable glimpse into his unorthodox dance-making
process.)

----- (1985) The Dancer and the Dance/Conversations with Jacqueline
Lesschaeve, New York/London: Marion Boyars.  (A book-length series of
interviews with Cunningham, spanning the first thirty years of his career
as a choreographer)

Denby, E. (1986) Collected Dance Writings, edited by Robert Cornfield and
William Mackay, New York: Knopf. (Some of the earliest reviews of
Cunningham as both a dancer and emerging choreographer)

Duberman, M. (1972) Black Mountain/An Exploration in Community, New York:
Dutton.
(A portrait of the North Carolina artists college where Cunningham and
Cage first collaborated with Robert Rauschenberg)

Johnston, J. (1998) Marmalade Me, introduction by Deborah Jowitt, afterword
by Sally Banes, Hanover/London: Wesleyan University Press. (Insightful
early reviews of Rune and Antic Meet as well as a polemical defence of
Cunningham and the founders of the Judson Dance Theater)

Jowitt, D. (1977) Dance Beat/Selected Views and Reviews, 1967-1976, New
York: Marcel Dekker. (Jowitt, the longtime dance critic of The Village
Voice, offers detailed and evocative descriptions of seminal Cunningham
dances including Squaregame, Summerspace, Place, Rainforest, and Scramble.)

----- (1985) The Dance in Mind, Boston: David R Godine.

----- Time and the Dancing Image New York: William Morrow, 1988. (An dance
history overview with an excellent chapter devoted to Cunningham which
opens with a wonderful account of how Cunninghams Antic Meet upset
prevailing modern dance orthodoxies when first performed at the American
Dance Festival in 1958)

Kostelanetz, R. (1988) Conversing with Cage, New York: Limelight Editions.
(A superbly edited compendium of Cages opinions on a wide variety of
subjects. Thematic fragments from countless interviews are skilfully woven
into a single line of argument on each topic.)

------, ed. (1992) Merce Cunningham/Dancing in Space and Time, Pennington
NJ: a cappella books. (An anthology with hard-to-find documents such as
early appreciations of Cunningham by James Waring, Sybil Shearer and Frank
OHara, as well as essays about Cunningham and the science of artificial
intelligence by Kenneth King and Stephen Smoliar)

Siegel, M. B. (1979) The Shapes of Change: Images of American Dance,
Boston: Houghton Mifflin. (Features close readings of both Summerspace and
Winterbranch)

Tomkins, C. (1968) The Bride and the Bachelors/Five Masters of the Avant-
Garde: Duchamp, Tinguely, Cage, Rauschenberg, Cunningham, New York: Viking
Compass Books.  (A good introduction to how Cage, Cunningham and
Rauschenberg were influenced by the legacy of Marcel Duchamp)

Vaughan, D. (1997) Merce Cunningham: Fifty Years, New York: Aperture. (A
year-by-year account of the first fifty years of Cunninghams career as a
dancer and choreographer illustrated with scores of ravishing photographs)

Moving Image Material
The Merce Cunningham Trust also maintains an extensive collection of films
and videos of Cunninghams work.  A comprehensive directory of these works
can be found at http://www.mercecunningham.org/film-media/media-list/.
Permission to view or loan these films and videos can be obtained by e-
mailing Lynn Wichern, Executive Director of the Trust, at
lwichern@mercecunningham.org

Mondays with Merce, written and produced by Nancy Dalva, is a series of
sixteen videos, each of which features Cunningham discussing key dimensions
of his work. Guests include former Cunningham dancers Valda Setterfield and
Neil Greenberg as well as choreographers such as Elizabeth Streb and Mark
Morris, both of whom readily acknowledge their debt to Cunningham.  All
sixteen installments are available free on line at
http://www.mercecunningham.org/film-media/mondays-with-merce/

YouTube offers easy-to-locate excerpts of the Cunningham Company performing
key dances such as BIPED, Changing Steps, Second Hand, Beach Birds,
Roaratorio, Variations V, and Split Sides. Many of these excerpts were
filmed at the Brooklyn Academy of Music and appear on line courtesy of BAM
and the Merce Cunningham Trust.

Photographs
Photographs of individual works are available on the Merce Cunningham Trust
website at http://www.mercecunningham.org/choreography

Paratextual Material
Merce Cunningham.  Portrait by Annie Leibovitz.  Google Images.
http://www.google.fr/imgres?imgurl=http://www.mercecunningham.org/mct/assets
/Image/portrait-
biography.jpg&imgrefurl=http://www.mercecunningham.org/merce-
cunningham/&h=225&w=225&sz=1&tbnid=XoJKf51X6YFhKM:&tbnh=186&tbnw=186&zoom=1&
usg=__v9udOINvZjaiFtFGLoQDl0FEFTI=&docid=KKjWJ8h5DlE5pM&itg=1&sa=X&ei=cH2jUf
rhN4iL0AWaioCIDQ&ved=0CHsQ_B0wCg


Endnotes
1. J. Cage, quoted in Vaughan (1997):  30-31.
2. Cunningham, Changes (1968), n.p.
3. J. Cage, Silence (1961): 90.
4. J. Cage, Silence (1961): 91.
5. M. Cunningham, Dance Magazine, Nov. 1957: 22.
6. M. Cunningham, Dance Observer, Aug./Sept., 1953: 107.
7. . A. Malraux, quoted in R. Roud, Godard (Garden City, N.Y.:  Doubleday,
1968).
8. M. Cunningham, Dance Magazine, Nov. 1957: 22.


Roger F. Copeland
