
METROPOLIS (1927)

Metropolis is a black-and-white silent German film directed by
Expressionist filmmaker Fritz Lang and co-written with his then wife, Thea
von Harbou. Set in the year 2026 in an urban dystopia where the rich
inhabit towering skyscrapers while faceless workers live and toil among
subterranean machines that keep the city running, it helped establish the
science fiction genre within cinema. The film took a notably contradictory
stance towards industrial modernity: while its narrative conveyed
Expressionist fears of technology by focusing on the machine rhythms and
dehumanizing conditions of the modern factory system, it visually
celebrated the Machine Age through Art Deco styling, particularly evident
in the design of the Maschinenmensch (machine-human), and the utilization
of new cinematographic techniques like the Schfftan process, by which
mirrors were used to project actors onto miniature futuristic sets.
Metropolis received mixed reviews at its 1927 Berlin premiere. While some
praised its technical achievements, others critiqued its thematic
contradictions, religious iconography, simplistic social message, and epic
length. It was severely edited and the original cut was lost for over
eighty years until the 2008 discovery of a print in the archives of a film
museum in Buenos Aires. Twenty-seven lost minutes were recovered and, after
a lengthy restoration process, the most complete version of the film was
released in 2010.

References and Further Reading:

Elsaesser, Thomas. Metropolis. London: British Film Institute, 2008.

Gunning, Tom. The Films of Fritz Lang: Allegories of Vision and Modernity.
London: British Film Institute, 2008.

Huyssen, Andreas. The Vamp and the Machine: Fritz Langs Metropolis in
After the Great Divide: Modernism, Mass Culture, Postmodernism.
Bloomington: Indiana UP,
1986.

Kaes, Anthony. Metropolis (1927): City, Cinema, and Modernity in Weimar
Cinema: An Essential Guide to Classic Films of the Era, Noah William
Isenberg, Ed. New York: Columbia University Press, 2009).

Kracauer, Siegfried. From Caligari to Hitler: A Psychological History of
the German Film. New York: North Rivers, 1947.

Minden, Michael; Bachmann, Holger. Fritz Lang's Metropolis: Cinematic
Visions of Technology and Fear. New York: Camden House, 2002.

Allison de Fren
Occidental College





Photos (attached in email):

 the city of Metropolis

 the Schfftan process

 the female robot


