Taylor & Francis – Encyclopedia of Modernism



About you

[Salutation]

Sorcha

[Middle name]

O’Brien



[Enter your biography]



Kingston University London



Your article

Scott, Michael (1905-1989)

[Enter any variant forms of your headword – OPTIONAL]

Michael Scott was the foremost proponent of Modern architecture in Ireland during the mid 20th century. He specialised in public commissions, particularly hospitals and transport hubs, as well as private houses. His rural hospital designs in the late 1920s and 1930s were influenced by the work of Finnish Alvar Aalto and Dutch J. J. P. Oud, and emphasised linear horizontal masses, often finished with decorative limestone cladding. He was responsible for promoting the International Style to both Irish architects and the Irish government in the 1930s, and designed the award-winning Irish Pavilion at the 1939 New York World’s Fair. His later work was characterised by the sculptural use of white concrete forms (as in his own home Geragh), and the integration of artwork, bringing colour and texture into his buildings. He is best known for the Corbusian design of the Dublin central bus depot Busáras, which used asymmetric organic shapes and incorporated coloured mosaic into the exterior. He influenced several generations of Irish architects through his practice, and was awarded the RIBA Gold Medal for Promotion of Architecture on his retirement in 1975.

Michael Scott was the foremost proponent of Modern architecture in Ireland during the mid 20th century. He specialised in public commissions, particularly hospitals and transport hubs, as well as private houses. His rural hospital designs in the late 1920s and 1930s were influenced by the work of Finnish Alvar Aalto and Dutch J. J. P. Oud, and emphasised linear horizontal masses, often finished with decorative limestone cladding. He was responsible for promoting the International Style to both Irish architects and the Irish government in the 1930s, and designed the award-winning Irish Pavilion at the 1939 New York World’s Fair. His later work was characterised by the sculptural use of white concrete forms (as in his own home Geragh), and the integration of artwork, bringing colour and texture into his buildings. He is best known for the Corbusian design of the Dublin central bus depot Busáras, which used asymmetric organic shapes and incorporated coloured mosaic into the exterior. He influenced several generations of Irish architects through his practice, and was awarded the RIBA Gold Medal for Promotion of Architecture on his retirement in 1975.



[File: WorldFair.jpg]

Figure 1 Michael Scott Architects, Irish Pavilion, exterior drawing, New York World’s Fair, 1939 (source IAA).

[File: Geragh.jpg]

Figure 2 Michael Scott Architects, Geragh, Sandycove, Co. Dublin, exterior photograph, 1938 (source IAA)

List of Works:

Nenagh General Hospital, Co. Tipperary, Ireland (1936)

Tullamore Hospital, Co. Offaly, Ireland (1937)

Geragh, Sandycove, Co. Dublin, Ireland (1939)

Irish Pavilion, New York World’s Fair, New York, USA (1939)

Portlaoise General Hospital, Co. Laoise, Ireland (1940)

Inchicore Chassis Works, Dublin, Ireland (1950)

Donnybrook Bus Garage, Dublin, Ireland (1952)

Busáras, Store Street, Dublin, Ireland (1953)

Abbey Theatre, Abbey Street, Dublin, Ireland (1966)

Further reading:

(Larmour)



(Scott and Walker)



(O'Regan)



(Rothery)



(Rowley)



(Michael Scott: A Changing Man)



(Busaras: RIAI Gold Medal Winner 1953-1955)



(Scott, Michael (1905-1989))



(Scott Tallon Walker Architects: Projects: Heritage' )