
Millay, Edna St. Vincent (1892-1950)

Edna St. Vincent Millay was a poet, playwright, and free-spirited bohme
who epitomized the aesthetically and sexually adventurous new woman of
the early twentieth century. Born in Rockland, Maine and raised by an
unconventional mother who encouraged her intellectual and artistic
pursuits, Millay achieved national attention at the age of nineteen with
her lyric poem Renascence (1912). Millays innovative poetry, for which she
received a Pulitzer Prize in 1923, integrated conventional forms with
unconventional content that celebrated sexual liberation and female
autonomy.

Her whimsical verse plays The Princess Marries the Page (c. 1915),Two
Slatterns and a King (c. 1915), and The Lamp and the Bell (1921) similarly
evoke traditional genres to challenge conventional gender roles and sexual
morality. After graduation from Vassar College in 1917, Millay moved to
Greenwich Village, where she found an artistic home as an actress and
playwright with the Provincetown Players. Her most notable dramatic success
came with their 1919-20 production of her anti-war fable Aria da Capo,a
satirical and reflexive re-visioning of commedia del artes Columbine and
Pierrot as Greenwich Village bohemians. Their witty harlequinade is
interrupted by a tragical-pastoral interlude in which two greedily
territorial shepherds kill each other. The harlequinade resumes, but with
the bodies of the two shepherds remaining on stage.During the next two
decades, Millay continued to write and perform her poetry, also completing
a number of short stories (under the name Nancy Boyd), an opera libretto
(1927), a translation of Charles Baudelaires Flowers of Evil (1936), and
the genre-defying poetic drama in blank verse Conversation at Midnight
(1937).

List of Works

Millay, Edna St. Vincent. (1956), Collected Poems, ed. Norma Millay, New
      York: Harper and Bros.

----- (1926) Three Plays, New York: Harper and Bros.

References and Further Reading

Cheney, Anne. (1975) Millay in Greenwich Village, Tuscaloosa: University of
Alabama Press.

Edna St.Vincent Millay Society, http://www.millay.org/.

Milford, Nancy. (2001) Savage Beauty: The Life of Edna St. Vincent Millay,
New York: Random House.

Thesing, William B., ed. (1993) Critical Essays on Edna St. Vincent Millay,
New York: G.K. Hall.

Cheryl Black, University of Missouri





Recommended Illustrations


[pic]

Edna St. Vincent Millay, c. 1914
[Photo by Arnold Genthe, Library of Congress:
http://www.loc.gov/pictures/item/agc1996000362/PP/]





















Aria da Capo in rehearsal at the Provincetown Playhouse, 1919
[Source: Billy Rose Theatre Collection, New York Public Library, Lincoln
Center]
