
Mingus, Charles
Dustin Garlitz

Charles Mingus (1929-1979) was an American jazz bassist, composer, and
bandleader.  He held strong social and political views and composed songs
on Civil Rights, such as Fables of Faubus, from his modern jazz album
Mingus Ah Um (1959), and Meditations on Integration (1964).  Other
compositions of Minguss musical modernism include the cool jazz inspired
anthem Haitian Fight Song (1957).  The bassist first gained a reputation
for performing on the cool jazz scene of Los Angeles, California in the
postwar 1940s.  Mingus would later relocate to New York City in the early
1950s, gaining a reputation as a bandleader who composed, performed, and
recorded modern jazz that was distinctly hard-bop in some settings, post-
bop in other contexts, and contained characteristics of the AVANT-GARDE,
as well as blues influences, and the music of black church gospels that he
was exposed to at an early age.

      Born Charles Mingus, Jr., April 22, 1922 in Nogales, Arizona, he moved
with his family to an area of Los Angeles known as Watts, where there were
a large population of blacks and Mexican Americans.  Mingus was brought up
in a family that attended services at an African Methodist Episcopal
Church, where he was first exposed to the black gospel music and which
later proved to be such a significant influence in his original jazz
compositions.  Minguss compositions Wednesday Night Prayer Meeting and
Moanin from his album Blues & Roots, and Better Git It in Your Soul
from his album Mingus Ah Um, all recorded in 1959, are examples of such
early church experiences influence on his modern jazz.

      Mingus started studying bass in high school, and had already played
piano, trombone, and cello.  His first experiences performing on bass were
in local dance bands.  Mingus established himself as a professional
musician on the cool jazz scene of Los Angeles, and also performed there
with bebop progenitors CHARLIE PARKER and DIZZY GILLESPIE when the two
instrumentalists made their first West Coast tour in the mid 1940s, after
gaining their initial popularity in New York City.  Mingus would later
relocate to New York City in the early 1950s to perform more frequently
with PARKER and GILLESPIE, and to gain a reputation as a bandleader and
composer.  In 1953, Mingus began composing music in a new music cooperative
known as the Jazz Composers Workshop, which he had formed the year
earlier.  Mingus released an album of his compositions from that experience
under such a title in 1955.  That year he recorded a live album at
Greenwich Villages Caf Bohemia, a venue frequented by beats, writers,
poets, and visual artists.


      Elements of Minguss musical composition and artistic beliefs took a
political turn after 1957.  By 1959, the bassist had recorded and released
the composition Fables of Faubus, written in protest of Arkansas
segregationist Governor Orval Faubus, who had attempted to prevent the
court-ordered desegregation of Little Rock Central High School in 1957.
Another example of Minguss social activism via modern jazz is his 1964
composition Meditations on Integration.  Mingus had lived for years in a
loft apartment with his family at 5 Great Jones Street in Greenwich
Village, which they were evicted from in 1966.  The eviction was featured
in a documentary film on Mingus that was released in 1968, Mingus: Charles
Mingus 1968, which also featured the musicians social and political
thoughts in an era of Civil Rights activism.


      The bassist had signed with Atlantic Records in 1956, and had already
moved to Columbia Records by 1959.  He moved again in the 1960s to the new
jazz label Impulse! Records, a recording company that had recently started
releasing albums from JOHN COLTRANE and other bandleaders of the newly
established AVANT-GARDE, as well as his early jazz hero DUKE ELLINGTON.
Mingus published his memoir Beneath the Underdog in 1971.  He wrote
approximately 300 compositions in the course of his artistic career, a
number of which were much more intricate than standard jazz compositions,
which reflected his early formal training by classical musicians.  An
example of these intricacies in his modern jazz composition is the title
track to his 1960 recorded album Reincarnation of a Lovebird.


      Mingus also recorded his poetry, such as the case on his album A
Modern Jazz Symposium of Music and Poetry (1957).  He released a solo album
of his jazz piano playing in 1963.  Mingus had used the piano to compose
music and also explain his intricate, large band arrangements to its member
musicians in the 1960s, such as the case as on his album The Black Saint
and the Sinner Lady (1963).  DUKE ELLINGTON was his largest inspiration as
a jazz composer.  Mingus recorded the album Money Jungle with him in 1962.
Minguss 1959 composition Open Letter to Duke was written for Ellington.
His composition Goodbye Pork Pie Hat (Theme for Lester Young), also
written that year, is a jazz ballad dedicated to the memory of the
Ellington Orchestras lead tenor saxophonist.  Mingus died in Cuernavaca,
Mexico on January 5, 1979.  The Mingus Big Band continues to perform the
bassists compositions today, tours internationally, and is led by his
widow Sue Mingus.

References and Further Readings:

Coleman, J. and A. Young (2004) Mingus/Mingus: Two Memoirs, New York:
Limelight Editions.

Giddins, G. and S. DeVeaux (2009) Jazz, New York and London: W.W. Norton.

Goodman, J.F. (2013) Mingus Speaks, Berkeley and Los Angeles, CA:
University of California Press.

Jenkins, T.S. (2006) I Know What I Know: The Music of Charles Mingus,
Westport, CT and London: Praeger.

Mingus, S.G. (2002) Tonight at Noon: A Love Story, New York: Pantheon
Books.

Porter, E. (2002) What Is This Thing Called Jazz?: African American
Musicians as Artists, Critics, and Activists.  Berkeley and Los Angeles,
CA: University of California Press.

Priestly, B. (1983) Mingus: A Critical Biography, New York: Da Capo Press.

Santoro, G. (2000) Myself When I Am Real: The Life and Music of Charles
Mingus, New York: Oxford University Press.

Whitehead, K. (2011) Why Jazz?: A Concise Guide, New York: Oxford
University Press.

Memoirs:

Mingus, C. (1991) Beneath the Underdog: His World as Composed by Mingus,
New York: Vintage.

Documentary Films about Charlie Mingus:

Mingus: Charles Mingus 1968, 1968.

Triumph of the Underdog, 1998 (This is the first comprehensive documentary
of Minguss life and work, and features him in performance in the 1960s and
1970s.)

Dustin Garlitz
University of South Florida
