
MIRRLEES, HOPE (1887  1978)

Helen Hope Mirrlees was a poet, novelist, essayist, biographer and
translator, born to Scottish parents in Kent, living for most of her
writing career in Paris and London. Overlooked for nearly a century,
Mirrlees has been known mainly through elusive mentions in the writings of
her better-known modernist acquaintances, including T.S. ELIOT, VIRGINIA
WOOLF and GERTRUDE STEIN. She began to emerge from obscurity with an essay
by Julia Briggs in 2007, which included an annotated facsimile of her
innovative long poem Paris (1920). There has since been a revival of
interest in her work, in the form of numerous articles and a Collection of
Poems (which also includes most of her essays).

Mirrlees is also known to some through her relationship to the classicist
JANE ELLEN HARRISON, the central figure of the Cambridge Ritualists, who
was Mirrleess tutor at Cambridge, co-translator from Russian, life
companion for the last fifteen years of HARRISONs life and a major
influence on Mirrleess work. After HARRISONs death Mirrlees converted to
Catholicism and disappeared from the literary scene, returning only decades
later with a biography of the Elizabethan antiquary Sir Robert Cotton
(1962) and a book of formally conservative verse in 1965.

Hand-printed by VIRGINIA WOOLF, who described it as obscure, indecent and
brilliant, Paris is arguably the gem in Mirrleess small but eclectic
oeuvre. Experimenting with the potential of poetry to signify visually as
well as verbally, juxtaposing high and low culture, it captures the sights,
sounds and atmosphere on a day-long journey through the city immediately
following the War. Mirrleess fantasy novel Lud-in-the-Mist (1926) has, by
contrast, enjoyed a popular following among fantasy readers. A deceptively
easy read, the novel allegorically explores deep cultural and aesthetic
concerns of the time, and is shot through with classical and other literary
allusions. Mirrleess two earlier realist novels (Madeleine: One of Love's
Jansenists [1919] and The Counterplot [1924]) have long been out of print.

In an essay reprinted in the Collected Poems, Mirrlees writes that a
swift, fleeting sense of the past is as near as I have ever got to a
mystical experience; indeed, an antiquarian streak, as well as an element
of mysticism, can be see to run through her works, which often self-
consciously explore the relationship between life and art.

List of works:

The Collected Poems of Hope Mirrlees. Ed. Sandeep Parmar. Manchester:
Carcanet Press, 2011.

Madeleine: One of Loves Jansenists (1919)

Paris: A Poem (1920)

The Counterplot (1924)

Lud-in-the-Mist (1926)

A Fly in Amber: Being an Extravagant Biography of the Romantic Antiquarian
Sir Robert Cotton (1962)

Moods and Tensions (1965)

References and further reading:

Briggs, Julia. Hope Mirrlees and Continental Modernism. Gender in
Modernism: New Geographies, Complex Intersections. Ed. Bonnie Kime Scott.
Illinois: University of Illinois Press, 2007. 261303.

Briggs, Julia. Modernism's Lost Hope: Virginia Woolf, Hope Mirrlees and
the Printing of Paris. Reading Virginia Woolf. Ed. Julia Briggs.
Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2006. 8095.

Carpentier, Martha Celeste. Ritual, Myth, and the Modernist Text: The
Influence of Jane Ellen Harrison on Joyce, Eliot, and Woolf. Amsterdam:
Gordon and Breach, 1998.

Nina Enemark, University of Glasgow
