
MIZOGUCHI, Kenji (16 May 1898- 24 August 1956)

Mizoguchi Kenji was a Japanese film director, considered to be one of the
three greatest directors of Japans golden age of cinema, along with Ozu
Yasujiro and Kurosawa Akira.  Mizoguchi was born in Tokyo, into poverty,
and his way in the world was greatly eased by the offices of his older
sister, who had achieved a degree of stability after being sold as a
geisha.  Mizoguchi started with the production company Nikkatsu in 1920,
and after the Great Kanto Earthquake destroyed Tokyo in 1923 he moved to
its Kyoto production studiosalthough he moved from studio to studio, he
would spend the majority of his career in Kyoto.  After directing a number
of early films set in the Meiji period, in 1936 Mizoguchi filmed a pair of
critical successes set in contemporary Osaka and Kyoto: Osaka erejii (Osaka
Elegy) and Gion no kydai (Sisters of the Gion).  Both exhibit Mizoguchis
most common theme: the struggle of women at the mercy of the often callous
men around them.  The former film represents the start of Mizoguchis long
association with screenwriter Yoda Yoshikata, while the latter opens with
one of Mizoguchis famous long takes, a dolly shot in which the camera
glides through a bankrupt merchants house, past an auction and a group of
creditors to the merchant family itself.  Mizoguchis one scene, one take
approach reached its apex with two subsequent films for Shchiku: Zangiku
monogatari (The Story of the Last Chrysanthemum, 1939) and Genroku
chushingura (The Loyal 47 Ronin, 1941-42).  Film critic Sato Tadao counts
only about 160 shots in the latter, a three-hour, thirty-five minute film
in two parts, for an average of 80 seconds per shot.  Mizoguchis long
takes are reflective of what Darrell William Davis has called monumental
style, a resistance to Classical Hollywood Cinema style utilizing long
takes and long shots, very slow camera movements, and a highly ceremonial
manner of blocking, acting and set design.  After the end of World War II,
Mizoguchi made a series of films capitalizing on the spirit of postwar
liberation, depicting women resisting oppression across time in Josei no
shori (The Victory of Women, 1946), Joyu Sumako no koi (The Love of Sumako
the Actress, 1947), Yoru no onnatachi (Women of the Night, 1948), and Waga
koi wa moenu (My Love Has Been Burning, 1949).  Following another group of
films based on contemporary novels, three Mizoguchi films based on classic
literary works brought him worldwide acclaim in the last three years of his
life.  Saikaku ichidai onna (The Life of Oharu, 1952), Ugetsu monogatari
(Ugetsu, 1953), and Sansho dayu (Sansho the Bailiff, 1954) would all win
prizes at the Venice Film Festival.  All three films show women suffering
under feudal systems in historical Japan, but all bear signs of the times
in which they were produced.  Ugetsu, in particular, with its depictions of
war profiteers, echoes the economic recovery in Japan made possible by
supplying materiel for the Korean War.  Another film highly regarded by
film scholars, Chikamatsu monogatari (The Crucified Lovers, 1954), was
based on a puppet play by the eighteenth-century playwright Chikamatsu
Monzaemon.  In March of 1956, Mizoguchi released his last film, Akasen
chitai (Street of Shame), centring on a group of contemporary prostitutes
in the fading traditional pleasure quarters.  He died of leukaemia later
that same year.  Mizoguchis influence can be felt among the French New
Wave directors as well as in the films of contemporary long-take Japanese
directors such as Koreeda Hirokazu.

Further reading:
Davis, D. (1995) Picturing Japaneseness: Monumental Style, National
Identity, Japanese Film, New York: Columbia University Press.
McDonald, K. (1984) Mizoguchi, Boston: Twayne.
Kirihara, D. (1992) Patterns of Time: Mizoguchi and the 1930s, Madison:
University of Wisconsin Press.

List of works:
Osaka erejii (Osaka Elegy, 1936)
Gion no kyodai (Sisters of the Gion, 1936)
Zangiku monogatari (The Story of the Last Chrysanthemum, 1939)
Genroku chushingura (The Loyal 47 Ronin, 1941-42)
Josei no shri (The Victory of Women, 1946)
Joy Sumako no koi (The Love of Sumako the Actress, 1947)
Yoru no onnatachi (Women of the Night, 1948)
Waga koi wa moenu (My Love Has Been Burning, 1949)
Saikaku ichidai onna (The Life of Oharu, 1952)
Ugetsu monogatari (Ugetsu, 1953)
Sansho dayu (Sansho the Bailiff, 1954)
Chikamatsu monogatari (The Crucified Lovers, 1954)
Akasen chitai (Street of Shame, 1956)

Paratextual material?
[The long-take opening of Sisters of the Gion or The Loyal 47 Ronin]


MIZOGUCHI, Kenji - Kendall Heitzman
University of Iowa

