
Modern Negro Art Word Count: 545

Modern Negro Art by James A. Porter (1905-1970) is a ground-breaking
historical study of African American art from slavery to the early
twentieth century. The first major text of its kind following Alain Lockes
ground-breaking The New Negro (1925), it was the main source of information
on African American artists until comparable historical surveys were
published in the 1970s. The book presents an overview of artists
biographies with analysis of the style and subject matter of their work.
The The New Negro Movement chapter lays out Porters main argument
against Lockes well-established racialist position. Locke advocated for
the development of a Negro art that would counter negative stereotypes
and present a more appealing image of the New Negro to American society.
Countering Locke, Porter argued that seeking to exploit the racial
concept limited the potential expression African American artists.
Instead he advocated for a treatment of African American art as already
integral to the history of American art. Rejecting Lockes emphasis on an
African ancestral heritage, Porter demonstrated the historical development
of African American art in North America from slavery to the early
twentieth century. His research and thorough attention to overlooked
African American artists remain among of the books most vital
contributions to the field of art history and accounts for the books
continuing impact.

Porter was himself an accomplished artist, trained at Howard University in
Washington D.C. (1923-1927). After he graduated, he taught painting and
drawing at Howard and eventually continued his studies in painting and art
history in New York and Paris. In 1933, Porter won the Schomberg Portrait
Prize from the Harmon Foundation for Woman Holding a Jug (1930), earning
him national attention. Porter continued to paint throughout his life. His
early realism gave way to a more expressive mode of painting when he
traveled to West Africa in 1963. The impetus for Modern Negro Art came from
Porters experience as an artist who, despite his success, was met with
condescension because of his race. Porter realised the need for recognition
to help encourage and improve opportunities for black artists across the
U.S. To this end, he earned a masters in art history from New York
University in 1937; his masters thesis was the basis for the book
manuscript that would be published as Modern Negro Art. Porters wife
Dorothy, the director of the Moorland-Spingarn Research Center at Howard,
assisted him in his research and prepared the extensive bibliography for
the book. The book was well-received by African American artists and
intellectuals and its enthusiastic reception among art students prompted
Porter to teach a course in African and African American art at Howard.
Later, when he became the director of the Howard University Gallery of Art,
Porter scheduled solo exhibitions for the days leading African American
artists, including Archibald J. Motley, Jr., Charles White, and Eldizer
Cortor. As in his scholarship, Porters leadership at Howard focused on
promoting the overlooked works by African American and later Afro-Caribbean
artists.


References and further readings:

Bearden, R. and H. Henderson. (1993) A History of African-American Artists:
   From 1792 to the Present, New York: Pantheon.

Morrison, K. (2011) Art Criticism: A Pan-African Point of View, February
   1979 in The Essential New Art Examiner, Dekalb, IL: Northern Illinois
   University.

Porter, J. A. (1943) Modern Negro Art, New York: Dryden Press.



[pic]
James A. Porter, Woman Holding a Jug, 1930, 21 1/4 x 23 in., Carl Van
   Vechten Gallery of Fine Arts, Fisk University, Nashville
http://www.fisk.edu/services-resources/fisk-university-galleries/the-carl-
   van-vechten-gallery


