
Modernism, Bengali Literature
Sibaji Bandyopadhyay

Just as modernity, modernism too has variegated histories. Years back  
to be precise in 1961  Carl E. Schorske had zeroed on Vienna to  chart  out
a general chronicle for  the  European  trend  of  modernism  (Fin-de-Sicle
Vienna:  Politics  and  Culture).  He  claimed,  if  modernism  were  to  be
understood as  an  intellectual  movement  geared  against  fond  nineteenth
century binaries, such as, rationalism and  romanticism,  individualism  and
socialism, realism and naturalism, then various twentieth century  Viennese
Schools supplied ample ammunition to batter  them  all.  Schorskes  belief
was, the gesture of shaking off the shackles of history that most  broadly
characterized European modernism could be most effectively  foregrounded  if
one hazarded to give a symptomatic reading to  the  new  culture-makers  in
the city of Freud.

Needless to say, such an approach for Bengal would prove to  be  disastrous.
Nonetheless, it is worth recording that  whatever  one  may  impute  to  the
expression Bengali modernism, it mostly  sprang  from  and  flourished  in
Kolkata, the city of Rabindranath.

Rabindranath Thakur [Tagore] (1861-1941) was a figure who simply  could  not
be wished away.  He  was  a  poet,  music-composer,  storyteller,  novelist,
dramatist,  painter,  essayist,  pioneer  of  alternative  pedagogy,  social
commentator, political analyst, master of belles  letter,  all  rolled  into
one. Decidedly, the nineteenth century  binaries  that  provided  points  of
departure for European modernists had  already  significantly  collapsed  in
his works. Rabindranaths presence thus was too overwhelming for  any  young
Bengali who, living in the twentieth centurys  second  and  third  decades,
aspired for literary fame. This itself partly explains why, despite the  awe
and adulation for the Grand-man of Arts, there was also defiance in the  air
then. Picking up the courage to think that Rabindranath may not be the  last
word of Bengali literature, Achintyakumar Sengupta (1903-1976) wrote in  the
late-twenties: Let Rabindra Thakur sit before  me  blocking  my  way,  /The
blazing light that my own eyes shall lit / Will dim  the  Epochs  Sun.  It
was  those  who  articulated  and,  more  importantly,  capitalized  on  the
burgeoning defiance, are viewed today as makers of Bengali modernism.

Directly  related  to  the  name  of  the  literary   journal   founded   by
Dineshranjan Das (1888-1941) and Gokulchandra Nag (1894-1925) in  1923,  the
shorthand colloquial nomenclature for Bengals Modernist  enterprise  became
Kallol (The Tumult).  The series of magazines that came in  Kallols  wake
 for instance, Kali-Kalam (Pen and Ink) in 1926, Pragati (Progress)  in
1927 from Dhaka, Parichay (Identity) in 1931, Kabita (Poetry) in 1935  
further fortified the Kallol Movement. The poets linked to these journals  
either in the capacity of editors  or  contributors  or  both    were  such
prominent poets as Buddhadeva  Bose (1908-1974), Sudhindranath Dutta  (1901-
1960), Premendra Mitra  (1904-1988),  Ajit  Dutta  (1907-1979),  Bishnu  Dey
(1909-1982), Achintyakumar Sengupta, Samar Sen (1916-1887), Jibanananda  Das
(1899-1954). It is a tribute to the churning  brought  out  by  the  Kallol
circle that even Amiya Chakravarty (1901-1986), the  Literary-secretary  of
Rabindranath, physically separated himself from the Master with the  express
intention of forging a poetic style of his own.

Certain, more or less common, strategies were adopted by the  modernists  in
their  bid  to  outgrow  Rabindranaths  all-embracing   influence.   They
consisted in (a) locating  the  lacunas  in  Tagores  oeuvre  in  terms  of
themes, (b) searching for models from the world of western literature  which
could  act  as  counterweights  and  help  in  instituting  some  sort  of
structural readjustment in diction. While the latter impulse paved  the  way
for the entry of such different poets as T. S.  Eliot,  Charles  Baudelaire,
W. B. Yeats, Stphane Mallarm, Paul Valry and others into  Bengali  poetry
as providers of material worth emulating as well as translating, the  former
resulted in the dogged attempts to depict life realistically,  with  special
attention to poverty and sexuality. The emphasis on  brutal  realism  during
the second and third decades, if not knowingly then  unconsciously,  derived
its inspiration from Karl Marx and Sigmund Freud and was most  effective  in
the novelistic discourse. The early fiction of  Manik  Bandyopadhyay  (1908-
1956) is perhaps the greatest  instance  of  the  success  of  the  project.
Bibhutibhusan Bandyopadhyays  (1894-1950)  and  Tarasankar  Bandyopadhyays
(1898-1971) novels too, albeit, on a softer  note,  consolidated  the  gains
achieved by valorizing the banal and the mundane.

From the forties,  particularly  amongst  writers  sworn  to  the  creed  of
Communist International, the realist tenor got further strengthened  by  the
conscious adoption of Marxist (read,  Orthodox  Marxist)  pronouncements  on
history and progress but progressively forfeited  the  Freudian  charge.
One of the  major  contributors  to  the  sphere  of  realistic  novels  was
Satinath Bhaduri (1906-1965) who started his career in 1946.

However, the twenties clamouring  against  Rabindranath  soon  met  with  a
crisis. As  it  was,  its  insistence  on  Rabindranaths  blindness  in
matters relating to  the  darker  aspects  of  sexuality  and  the  pathetic
condition of the underdogs of society was far  too  exaggerated.  But,  when
Rabindranath himself  jumped  into  the  anti-Tagore  bandwagon  and  almost
usurped the position  of  modernist  vanguard,  the  calculated  gesture  of
rejection so carefully crafted by the twenties pioneers seemed to lose  its
sting. In his novel Sesher Kabita (The Farewell Poem)  published in book-
form in 1929  Rabindranath scripted  the  anti-Tagore  manifesto  with  the
slogan that, indeed it was refreshing to have lesser breed  of  fruits  than
to keep consuming the best.

Much later, in 1952, Buddhadeva Bose summed up  the  Kallol  Agitation  with
due alacrity in the essay Rabindranath O  Uttarsadhak  (Rabindranath  and
the Later Protagonists). His main contention then  became:  (a)  the  chief
problem with the writers who  immediately  followed  Rabindranath  was  that
they were destined to copy Tagore even when it was virtually  impossible  to
do so; (b) what they thus failed to appreciate was Tagores insatiable  urge
to transcend himself; (c) one of the first persons to  demonstrate,  without
however an iota of self-reflection, that one did not always need to harp  on
the same tune was the youthful poet-composer Kazi Nazrul Islam  (1899-1976);
(d) enthused by Nazrul, the forerunner of modernism by  default,  the  later
writers opted for a rupture that  could  connote  difference  by  not  being
faithful to Tagore in letter  but  being  so  to  his  spirit  of  ceaseless
innovation.

Now that the storm and stress surrounding Rabindranath has subsided,  it  is
easy to point out the writers  who  began  their  literary  careers  in  the
twenties or thirties and ended up producing genuine post-Tagore,  and  hence
by extension, modernist  works.  Strangely,  the  number  is  not  too  big.
However, there can be no  question  that  the  list  is  bound  to  include,
Sudhindranath  Dutta,  Manik  Bandyopadhyay,  Bibhutibhusan   Bandyopadhyay,
Satinath          Bhaduri           and           Jibanananda           Das.


Timeline
1923        Literary journal Kallol starts publication
1926        Kali-Kalam
1927        Pragati, literary journal, Jibananda Dass first  collection  of
poems
1929        Tagores Sesher Kabita
1930        Buddhadeva Boses first collection of poems
1935        Poetry quarterly, Kabita
1949-51     Satinath Bhaduris novel Dhondai Charita Manas


Selected Reading
   1. Achintyakumar Sengupta, Kallol Yuga, Achintyakumar Rachanabali (Volume
      11), Kolkata: Granthalaya, 1989, pp. 1-196
   2. Buddhadev Bose, Rabindranath O Uttarsadhak, Sahityacharcha, Kolkata:
      Deys Publishing, 1981, pp. 116-130
   3. Buddhadev Bose, An Acre of Green Grass, Kolkata: Papyrus, 1997, pp. 1-
      116
   4. Sudhindranath  Dutta,  Preface  to  Sambarta,  Sudhindranath  Dutter
      Kabyasamgraha, Kolkata: Deys Publishing, 1976, pp. 171-173
   5. Sukumar Sen, Chapters 10 & 11, Bangala Sahityer Itihas  (Volume  4),
      Kolkata: Eastern Publishers, 1976. pp. 256-315
   6. Carl E. Schorske, Fin-de-Sicle  Vienna:  Politics  and  Culture,  New
      York: Vintage Books, 1981


