
Modern Chinese Woodblock Prints

The history of Chinese Modern prints is intimately tied to social and
political developments in 20th century China. On May 4, 1919, a protest
against the provisional governments feeble response to the treaty of
Versailles and the Japanese occupation attracted left-leaning students and
artists to the city of Beijing.  Amongst the protestors, a cluster of
artists and writers used the immediacy of the woodblock to mass-produce
subversive and anti-Japanese political images and messages. Under the
mentorship of Lu Xun (, 1881-1936), one of Chinas greatest Modern
literary figures, they adopted the nianhua (, new year calendar prints)
or xinnian huazhi (flowery new year calendar) as a vehicle for
experimentation with wood block printing. The creative woodcut movement
pioneered by Lu Xun sought to undermine the petit-riche ownership of the
woodblock and re-contextualise art as the property of the masses. In order
to reconcile the aims of the Creative Woodblock movement with the tastes of
the rural populations Lu Xun advocated the adoption of familiar peasant
pictorial devices in the production of a new art.

      In 1931, Lu Xun engaged the Japanese artist and art teacher Uchiyama
Kakichi to give classes in Japanese woodcutting and wood-engraving
techniques. Many progressive artists including some from the Eighteen
Society and the League of Leftwing Artist attended the class held in the
Japanese Language School in Shanghai.  And whilst the classes lasted just
one week, from 17 to 22 August, they had a dramatic impact on the Creative
Woodblock Movement, also known as the Modern Woodblock or New Woodblock
movement. In Shanghai, the group continued to develop their practice
through the observation of German Expressionist and Soviet prints from Lu
Xuns Library and personal collection, including works by Kathe Kollwitz,
Frans Masereel and Nikolai Piskarev.

      Two works by Li Qun, The Lu Xun College of Literature and Art at
Yanan (1938) and Lu Xun (1935), an example of the lingxiu xiang (a genre
of leaders portraiture adopted from Soviet practice) stand as a testimony,
not only to the stature of Lu Xun, but also to the widespread movement of
work influenced by European and Soviet artistic traditions. For Li Hua at
least, the work of Kathe Kollwitz proved a great inspiration. Her series of
sketches on The Peasants Revolt describe proud figures emerging from a
predominantly black background that provides a clear visual allegory for
the enlightenment and liberation of the Chinese peasantry emerging from a
dark history of feudal oppression.
                           [pic]
      Li Hua, China, Roar!, 1936, woodcut print, image in the public domain.

      By the late 1930s the Creative Woodblock movement could be
differentiated from the traditional woodblock practices in at least three
ways. Firstly, representations of common people replaced the depiction of
deities and prominent cultural figures, and images were injected with
political content to replace the religious and superstitious. Secondly,
European oil based printing inks were used instead of the traditional water
based Chinese inks, which allowed for a new range of formal expressive
effects. Also, the implementation of Japanese technique brought with it a
use of different knives and rubbing pads and their relevant methods and
effects. Thirdly, in the new movement, the artist was the sole producer,
designing, cutting and printing the block instead of the division of labour
that existed previously.

      Whilst Mao largely agreed with Lu Xuns methodology he encouraged
artists to produce art with a less expressionistic and more positivist vein
that reinforced the aims of the revolution. To this effect, posters,
calendar and New Year prints depicting the dissemination of knowledge on
the topics of hygiene, midwifery and literacy were widely produced and
distributed.  In May 1942, at the time of Maos famous address to writers
and artists in Yanan there was already a large community of Lu Xuns ex-
students living in the area who maintained great respect for the recently
deceased Lu Xun and his theories on a modern national art.


Many early revolutionaries such as those from the May 4 demonstrations had
converged in the area from Shanghai to escape censorship and political
oppression exercised by the White Terror campaign of 1931. Added to the
growing numbers in 1940 were Liu Xian (, 1915-1990), Zhang Wang
(,1915-1992), Li Qun (, 1912-2012) as well as Jiang Feng (,1910-
1982), Hu Yichuan (,1910-2000), Chen Tiegeng (,1908-1970), Chen
Jiu (, 1917-1943) and Ma Da (, 1903-1978) who were scheduled to
teach at the Lu Xun Art and Literature Centre, which had been established
in Luyi in 1938.


In fact the legacy of Lu Xun and the Creative Wood-block Movement remained
a significant source of inspiration for Mao and effectively provided many
artists with the theoretical and practical training demanded by him. Mao
went on to appropriate both the working machinery (being the labour of the
local peasants) and the pictorial devices of the nianhua and the
lianhuanhua in the cultivation of a new national form that promoted the
interest of a new cultural army.

References and Further Reading
Buck, Pearl S. (1944) China in Black and White: An album of woodcuts by
contemporary Chinese artists, New York: The John Day Company.

Dixon, C. (1996) Lu Xun and New Art in The Peoples Progress, 20th Century
Chinese Woodcuts, Sydney: AGNSW.

Guo Tong & Smith, Karen (1998) The Carved Image in China, 1932-1992,
Beijing: The Courtyard Gallery.

Holm, David (1991) Art and Ideology in Revolutionary China, Oxford:
Clarendon Press.

Li Hua (1995) Chinese Woodcuts, Beijing: Foreign Languages Press.

Tang Xiaobing (2008) Origins of the Chinese Avant-Garde: The Modern Woocut
Movement, Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.

