
Monk, Thelonious (1917-1982)

Dustin Garlitz

Thelonious Monk was an American jazz pianist and composer.  One of the
earliest performers in the bebop movement of modern jazz dating from the
mid-twentieth century, namely the 1940s in New York City, Monk performed
original compositions in neighborhoods there such as HARLEM and GREENWICH
VILLAGE, as well as the thriving 52nd Street district of jazz nightclubs.
The pianist performed with other leading figures in modern jazz including
bebop progenitors CHARLIE PARKER and DIZZY GILLESPIE, and AVANT-GARDE
saxophonist JOHN COLTRANE, all of whom performed and recorded Monks
compositions.  Monks compositions are some of the most commonly performed
jazz standards today.  Giddins and DeVeaux (2009) argue that Monks
compositions are the second most frequently performed standards written
from any one composer in jazz today, after those of pianist and big-band
leader DUKE ELLINGTON.

      Thelonious Monk, born October 10, 1917 in Rocky Mount, North Carolina,
moved to New York City at age four.  Monk was primarily self-taught on
piano, although he did study music in 1939.  He wrote approximately seventy
musical compositions in the course of his artistic career.  One of his
earliest compositions, the ballad Round Midnight, became a jazz standard
almost instantly.  Monk performed and recorded with modern jazz trumpeter
MILES DAVIS on several occasions, including an album DAVIS released as a
bandleader, Miles Davis and the Modern Jazz Giants (1954).  His composition
Round Midnight was the theme song of Daviss Quintet album Round About
Midnight (1955), released on Columbia Records and featuring saxophonist
JOHN COLTRANE as a band member.

      Earlier in the 1940s, Monk had frequently performed at after-hour jam
sessions of bebop jazz at the nightclub Mintons Playhouse in HARLEM,
experimenting with the musics new harmonies along with other leading
figures in modern jazz such as alto saxophonist CHARLIE PARKER and
trumpeter DIZZY GILLESPIE, once Monk had become the nightclubs house
pianist in 1941.  Monks Quartet work with tenor saxophonist JOHN COLTRANE
at the Five Spot Caf in GREENWICH VILLAGE, a venue frequented by the
beats, writers, poets, and artists, is regarded as the beginnings of AVANT-
GARDE jazz in New York City in the 1950s by some.  Monk performed his
eccentric composition Epistrophy with COLTRANE at the Five Spot and on
his studio date with him in 1957.

      Monks Two Volume album Genius of Modern Music was released by modern
jazz label Blue Note Records in the early 1950s, and features original
compositions of Monks that have been regarded by jazz historians and
critics alike as ahead of their time, including the atonal Off Minor, and
quirky Thelonious (Volume 1), and the intricate Criss Coss, Four In
One, and Skippy (Volume 2).  Monks composition Straight, No Chaser,
is one of the most frequently played blues form standards in jazz, and
his 52nd Street Theme is often performed by jazz musicians at concerts to
mark the end of the their live performance, in that they then immediately
walk off the stage once they stop playing the compositions melody.  Monk
named the composition after the district of jazz nightclubs he frequently
performed at in New York Citys Midtown Manhattan, those that were integral
to the performance of bebop in the movements early years, especially as
the spreading of the musical movement began to represent a transition into
a distinctly modern phase of jazz in the 1940s and 1950s.

      Monk struggled with mental illness for a large portion of his life,
preferring to spend the later years of his life in relative isolation in
his Riverside Drive Apartment home on New York Citys Upper West Side of
Manhattan.  He spent the last six years of his life as a guest in the home
of Baroness Nica Pannonica de Koenigswarter, who was a patron and supporter
of other leading figures in modern jazz, such as CHARLIE PARKER.  Monk died
of a stroke on February 17, 1982 in Englewood, New Jersey.  In 1993, he was
posthumously awarded the Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award.  In 2006, Monk
was posthumously awarded a Pulitzer Prize Special Citation on the basis of
a body of musical composition that significantly impacted the evolution of
jazz.  His influence had always reached beyond music, with Robert
Rauschenberg and other modernist creating art in his honor in the 1950s.


References and Further Readings:

Appel, A., Jr. (2002) Jazz Modernism: From Ellington and Armstrong to
Matisse and Joyce, New York: Alfred K. Knopf.

Bliek, R. (2001) The Thelonious Monk Reader, New York: Oxford University
Press.

Fitterling, T. (1997) Thelonious Monk: His Life and Music, (Trans. R.
Dobbin), Berkeley, CA: Berkeley Hills Books.

Giddins, G. and S. DeVeaux (2009) Jazz, New York and London: W.W. Norton.

Gourse, L. (1998) Straight, No Chaser: The Life and Genius of Thelonious
Monk, New York: Schirmer.

Kelley, R.D.G. (2010) Thelonious Monk: The Life and Times of an American
Original, New York: Free Press.

Solis, G. (2007) Monks Music: Thelonious Monk and Jazz History in the
Making, Berkeley and Los Angeles, CA: University of California Press.

List of Works:

Genius of Modern Music, Vol. 1
Genius of Modern Music, Vol. 2
Brilliant Corners
Monks Music
Underground
Criss-Cross
Thelonious Monk
Thelonious Monk with John Coltrane
Thelonious Monk and Sonny Rollins
Thelonious Monk  The Unique
Thelonious Monk Plays Duke Ellington
Monks Dream
Thelonious Alone in San Francisco
Solo Monk
Thelonious Monk Quartet: Misterioso
Monk
Thelonious Himself
Monks Dream
Straight, No Chaser
Monks Blues
Miles and Monk at Newport
Thelonious Monk at the Blackhawk
5 By Monk By 5
Mulligan Meets Monk
Thelonious in Action: Thelonious Monk Quartet with Johnny Griffin 
Recorded Live at the Five Spot Caf, New York City
The Thelonious Monk Orchestra at Town Hall
Big Band and Quartet in Concert
Standards
Monk in Tokyo
Monk in France
Monk in Italy
Live at the It Club - Complete
Live at the Jazz Workshop - Complete
Live at the 1964 Monterey Jazz Festival

Compiled Box Sets:

The Complete Blue Note Recordings of Thelonious Monk
The Complete Riverside Recordings of Thelonious Monk
The Thelonious Monk Quartet: The Complete Columbia Studio Albums Collection
Monk Alone: The Complete Columbia Solo Studio Recordings - 1962-1968
Thelonious Monk: The Complete Prestige Recordings

Posthumously Released Live Recordings:

The Thelonious Monk Quartet featuring John Coltrane  Live at the Five
Spot: Discovery!
Thelonious Monk Quartet with John Coltrane at Carnegie Hall

Sideman Appearances:

Miles Davis: Miles Davis and the Modern Jazz Giants
Miles Davis: Bags Groove

Sonny Rollins: Moving Out
Sonny Rollins: Sonny Rollins, Vol. 2

Coleman Hawkins: Bean and the Boys

Gigi Gryce: Nicas Tempo

Clark Terry: In Orbit

Milt Jackson: Wizard of the Vibes

Art Blakey: Art Blakeys Jazz Messengers with Thelonious Monk

Charlie Parker: The Essential Charlie Parker

Don Byas: Midnight at Mintons

Charlie Christian and Dizzy Gillespie: After Hours

Dizzy Gillespie Big Band: Showtime at the Spotlite  52nd Street, New York
City, June 1946

Documentary Film about Thelonious Monk:

Thelonious Monk: Straight, No Chaser (1988)

Dustin Garlitz
University of South Florida

