
Monochrome Movement (Tansaekhwa)
Monochrome Paintings, otherwise known in Korea as Tansaekwa, was an art
movement that emerged after the Korean War, lasting from the late 1960s
through the 1980s. It rose to prominence during an era of strict censorship
and rapid industrialisation in the 1960s and the 1970s. The policies
imposed by South Koreas then president Park Chung-hee restricted direct
political messages, thus actuating the emergence of hidden themes in
abstractions within the limitations administered by the state. The
Monochrome movements pioneer Park Seobo (1931-present) worked both with
abstract artists who were critical of the government, and with the National
Documentary Paintings Project, producing government-commissioned artworks
that advocated nationalism. Through abstraction, Monochrome paintings can
raise awareness without being overtly political and still resonate Korean
tradition without submitting to the confines of the artistic establishment
of the time. The Monochrome movement did not only respond to political
censorship, but also to the established standards of the Korean art world.
The Monochrome movement eliminated the notions of representation and the
distance that sets the image apart from the canvas.

Prominent artists such as Park Seo-bo, Ha Chong-hyun (1935-present), Kim
Gui-line (Kim Ki-rin, 1936-present), Choi Myoeng-young (1941-present), and
Kwon Young Woo (1941-present) developed their homogenous ideas individually
until 1975, when they became part of an official collective after the group
was named the Ecole de Seoul. Despite each artists diverse methods,
Monochrome paintings share common attributes in their minimal use of color,
their emphasis on the flatness of the canvas, and their references to East
Asian spirituality, specifically in Taoism and the East Asian
intellectualists views of nature.

Monochrome paintings have been often linked with Japans Mono-ha movement
and the United States Minimalism. Their theoretical basis is indeed
influenced by Japans Mono-ha movement, more specifically by one of their
leading figures, Lee Ufan, a renowned Korean artist active in Japan. Unlike
the link with Mono-ha, the connection with the Wests Minimalism was
strongly denied. Minimalisms concept of the rejection of the human touch
contrasted strongly with Monochrome movements emphasis on the meditative,
labour intensive nature of the actual practice of creating art. Still,
Monochrome paintings were perceived as corresponding with the Minimalism in
the West due to their two-dimensional abstraction. Nonetheless, it is this
formalistic attribute that made the movement preferable in the West and
eventually, greatly successful in the international art scene.

References and further reading

Kim, Yong-na. (2005) 20th Century Korean Art, Laurence King Publishing. (A
comprehensive text that illustrates the role of the monochrome movement in
the development of Korean modern art).

Kee, Joan. (2013) Contemporary Korean Art: Tansaekhwa and the Urgency of
Method, University of Minnesota Press. (A book dedicated entirely to the
history, development and legacy of the monochrome movement).
