Taylor & Francis – Encyclopedia of Modernism



About you

[Salutation]

Christopher

[Middle name]

Norris



[Enter your biography]



Cardiff University



Your article

Mukařovský, Jan (1891-1975)

[Enter any variant forms of your headword – OPTIONAL]

Czech linguist and literary theorist Jan Mukařovský was a leading member of the Prague Linguistic Circle and a prominent contributor to the project of structuralist poetics. Building on ideas first developed by the Russian formalist school, Mukařovský set out to analyse the characteristic features – or devices – that typified literary (especially poetic) language, as opposed to prosaic or quotidian discourse. Like his colleague Roman Jakobson (1896-1982) he sought to specify just how it was that poetry and art required or encouraged the reader/viewer to focus on just those distinctive traits that marked the aesthetic function in its various manifestations.

Czech linguist and literary theorist Jan Mukařovský was a leading member of the Prague Linguistic Circle and a prominent contributor to the project of structuralist poetics. Building on ideas first developed by the Russian formalist school, Mukařovský set out to analyse the characteristic features – or devices – that typified literary (especially poetic) language, as opposed to prosaic or quotidian discourse. Like his colleague Roman Jakobson (1896-1982) he sought to specify just how it was that poetry and art required or encouraged the reader/viewer to focus on just those distinctive traits that marked the aesthetic function in its various manifestations. Early structuralists were much preoccupied with this quest for the criterion of ‘literarity’ or ‘literariness’, although it later came under fire from post-structuralists as a throwback to ‘essentialist’ habits of thought. However, Mukařovský was also a historian of Czech literature and hence alert to such charges. Indeed, his theory of literary language as a ‘secondary modelling system’ in relation to everyday-communicative language was in part designed to justify his claim that literature did not passively reflect the dominant ideological structures of its time but took up a critical distance from them. In this respect Mukařovský’s thinking took a lead from the Russian formalist Viktor Shklovsky (1893-1984) and his concept of poetic ‘defamiliarization’.



List of Works

(1977) The World and Verbal Art: Selected Essays by Jan Mukarovsky. ed. and trans. P. Steiner and J. Burbank, New Haven: Yale University Press.

(1978) Structure, Sign and Function: Selected Essays by Jan Mukařovský. ed. and trans. P. Steiner and J. Burbank, New Haven: Yale University Press.

Further reading:

(To Honour the Eightieth Birthday of Jan Mukarovsky)

(Yashtremski)