
Muktibodh, Gajanan Madhav (1917-1964)

Greg Goulding


Gajanan Madhav Muktibodh was a prominent poet for both modernism and Left-
oriented progressive Hindi literature. His development of the imaginary,
his generic innovation of the lambi kavita (long poem), and his
engagement with the confluence of aesthetics, politics, and ethics formed a
new model for modernist Hindi poetry. He became a leading figure in Nai
Kavita (new poetry) after his inclusion in the seminal 1943 poetry
anthology Tar Saptak (The Higher Octave), and published individual poems,
fiction, and criticism throughout his life, but it was his first volume of
poems, Chand ka Munh Teha Hai (The Moon Wears a Crooked Smile), published
at his death, which had the greatest impact on his posthumous reputation.

Muktibodh was born within then-autonomous Gwalior State, in which his
father was a police inspector. Muktibodh grew up speaking Marathi; his
brother, Saratchandra, became a prominent Marathi poet, and Muktibodh
maintained a life-long engagement with Marathi literature. Muktibodh began
writing while still a student in Ujjain and Indore; his earliest poems show
the influence of Chhayavad poetry, and in particular Makhanlal Chaturvedi
and Jayshankar Prasad. While teaching secondary school he became associated
with writers Nemichandra Jain and Prabhakar Machwe, which led to the
creation of Tar Saptak; this anthology, edited by Satchidanand Vatsyayan
'Agyey,' was a signal moment in the shift in Hindi towards Nai Kavita and
modernist experimentation. Muktibodh's own poetry in this collection, in
its concern for science, political action, and imaginary landscapes,
indicates the later direction of his work.

After years of financial struggle, Muktibodh was appointed in 1957 as
lecturer of Hindi in a college in the small Chhattisgarh town of
Rajnandgaon. The resulting stability coincided with the gradual increase of
his reputation, and the writing of some of his most important work, in
particular the long poem Andhere Mein [In the Dark]. This poem follows
its narrator through a night of fascist menace and political violence.
Declining health in 1964 culminated in a stroke, coma, and finally his
death. At this time his literary associates compiled his poetry into the
collection Chand ka Munh Teha Hai.

His poetry is best known for its use of what Muktibodh himself defined as
fantasy: an attempt to join the personal sensations of the poet with
political and social circumstance, thus fusing together Romantic and
Modernist forms of expression with the competing aesthetic model of
Realism, then extremely prominent due to the cultural influence of
Communism in Hindi. Related to his use of fantasy is his formal innovation;
his long poems stitch together a series of dreamlike visions and
impressions, and are comparable to contemporary developments in the mural
in painting or to montage in film.

Muktibodh's works are collected in his Rachnavali, currently six volumes,
in addition to several other volumes of uncollected materials. Muktibodh
has as yet been little translated into English; some of his poems are
collected in Lucy Rosenstein's anthology New Poetry in Hindi, and Andhere
Mein has been translated into English by Krishna Baldev Vaid.



Chronology of Muktibodh's Works:

Tr Saptak (1943) (Contributor)
Kamyan: Ek Punarvicar (1950; 2nd Edition 1961)
Bhrat: Itihs aur Sandarbh (1962)
Na Kavit k tmasaghar tath anya nibandh (1964)
Chnd k Munh Teh Hai (1964)
Bhr Bhr Khk Dhl (1980)
Racanval [Collected Works], 6 vols, edited by Nemicandra Jain, (1980; 2nd
Ed. 1997)
Jab Prana-cinh baukhl uhe (2009)
e-e (2009)

Selected Translations into English:

New Poetry in Hindi (Trans. Lucy Rosenstein: 2003)
In the Dark  (Trans. Krishna Baldev Vaid: 2001)


Timeline:


           1943                   1957                    1997
           Tar Saptak            Appointment as            Rachnavali
           (contributor)               Lecturer in Hindi               (6
      vols)
|           |          |          |          |            |
1917                     1950                        1964
Birth                Kamayani:                       Death
                  Ek Punarvicar        Chand ka Munh
                                           Terha Hai

