
Clare Davies

                                                                   373 words

Museum of Modern Egyptian Art (Mathaf al-Fann al-Misri al-Hadith)

The Museum of Modern Egyptian Art (Mathaf al-Fann al-Hadith, or Muse dArt
Moderne) began as a collection initiated in the mid-1920s, paid for by the
state, and overseen by the Society of the Friends of Art. The inauguration
of the museum  on February 8, 1931 represented the achievement of a key
component of a wider blueprint for the arts implemented by the countrys
first state-run administrative body for the arts. The museums mandate
covered the acquisition and display of both Egyptian and non-Egyptian
(primarily European) works of art including oil paintings, watercolors,
lithographs, etchings, sculpture, medals, and ceramics. The collection
originally included works dating to as early as the 18th century up to the
contemporary moment. Its expansion was supported by a budget allocated by
the state for the purchase of works, as well as private donations.
Contemporary Egyptian artists figured alongside the general public as the
museums original target audience. The museum seemed to guarantee the
Egyptian publics access to important work. Plans devoted to restructuring
Cairos advanced school of art often treated the museum as an important
consideration. While much of the early collection came from Europe and not
Egypt, as critics noted at the time, the acquisition of works by Egyptian
artists was understood as part of the institutions mandate, and the museum
was seen as central to the realiszation of an Egyptian artistic
renaissance.

Steps taken by the Society of the Friends of Art (henceforth the SFA, est.
1923) in the mid- to late-1920s laid the grounds for the museums
establishment. In 1924, the Ministry of Education entrusted the SFA with
access to funds for the purchase of works exhibited at the annual salon. In
1927-28, the latter were displayed as what was likely the first permanent
public exhibition of modern Egyptian art in rooms at the SFAs headquarters
in the Tigrane Palace (also referred to as the Palais Tigrane, la Maison
des Arts, or Saray al-Funun al-Jamila) at 4 Sh. Nubar (todays Sh. al-
Jumhuriyya).

In 1930, the Ministry rented the Mosseiri Palace on Sh. 26 July in downtown
Cairo, and the museums administration was made independent of the SFA.
Works were transferred to the site and the museum opened its doors the
following year. It moved in 1935 to Bustan Palace at 34, Sh. Hawayati
(today Sh. Bustan), Bab al-Luq, where the collection was given its first
truly complete and rational hanging, according to a former director, with
works divided by school and century, and augmented with significant new
donations. The museum subsequently relocated to a number of sites within
downtown Cairo before being closed in 1962-1963. The collection moved to a
villa in Doqqi in 1966. It opened as the Museum of Modern Egyptian Art
(Mathaf al-Fann al-Misri al-Hadith) in its current location on the grounds
of the Opera House (Dar al Opera) in Zamalik in the late 1980s.

References and Further Readings
Ministry of Culture, Fine Arts Sector. Mathaf al-Fann al-Misri al-
Hadith/Museum of Modern      Egyptian Art. Website of the Museum of
Egyptian Modern Art [Arabic/English]. Last   accessed March 30, 2014.
<http://www.modernartmuseum.gov.eg>
Ministry of Education, al-Usbua al-Dawli li-l-Matahif, min 8-14 October
1956 [International    Museum Week, October 8-14 1956].Cairo: Maktabat
Wizarat al-Tarbiya wa-l-Taalim,  1956.
Le Muse dArt Moderne (Museum of Modern Art). Catalogue. Cairo: Societ
Orientale de

      Publicit, 1950. Original published in 1935.

Gharib, Samir, ed. Mathaf al-Fann al-Masri al-Hadith [The Museum of Modern
Egyptian Art].   Cairo: al-Markaz al-Qawmi li-l-Funun al-Tashkiliyya, 1992.
Salmawy, Muhammad, and Mustafa Razzaz. Muhammad Mahmud Khalil: al-Rajul
      wa-l-Mathaf/Mohamed Mahmoud Khalil: L'Homme et le Muse [Muhammad
Mahmud      Khalil: The Man and the Museum]. Cairo: Ministry of Culture,
1995.




