
MUSIQUE CONCRTE
John Dack

MUSIQUE CONCRTE (concrete music) is a music genre that developed from the
technology of radio broadcasting. The inventor of MUSIQUE CONCRTE, the
Frenchman Pierre Schaeffer (1910-1995), realized the significance of
hearing sounds over the radio where any visual reference to a source is
removed. This is known as the acousmatic situation. Standard radio dramas
contain dialogue, sound effects and music which support the unfolding of
the narrative; these are usually sounds that are recognized by listeners
without difficulty. However, Schaeffer also concluded that when the
acousmatic situation is applied to recorded sounds in general, clear
reference to source or causality is suppressed and sounds are heard as
sound objects. This is particularly evident if the sounds are ambiguous or
difficult to verify. Rather than seeking to identify a source or agency,
the listener is encouraged to scrutinize all of the sounds constituent
characteristics such as pitch, vibrato and texture. These recorded sounds
can be used as material in compositions which themselves exist solely as
recordings. Musical meaning results from perceived relationships between
the characteristics selected by the composer. The recorded sound objects
are usually transformed and de-contextualized further by studio techniques
such as reversal, editing, filtering, acceleration and deceleration.

MUSIQUE CONCRTE
The term MUSIQUE CONCRTE was invented by the French polymath Pierre
Schaeffer. In 1948 he wrote:

I have coined the term Musique Concrte for this commitment to compose with
materials taken from given experimental sound, in order to emphasize our
dependence, no longer on preconceived sound abstractions, but on sound
fragments which exist in reality, and which are considered as discrete and
complete sound objects, even if and above all when they do not fit in with
the elementary definitions of music theory. (Schaeffer, 1952: 22)

The given sounds referred to in this quotation are recordings from any
source such as metal sheets, bells, bicycle horns, bird-calls as well as
musical instruments, the natural or urban environments, sounds of human
action and electronic sounds. Sounds were originally recorded on flexible
shellac discs, later magnetic tape became the preferred medium. Some sounds
were left unmodified, though mere de-contextualisation was not always
sufficient to remove unequivocal reference to a source. Consequently,
transformation by various studio techniques such as acceleration,
deceleration, reversal, editing and filtering was frequently employed. The
sounds were then assembled in compositions by processes of montage and
mixing. Contemporary musicians who wish to appropriate the ethos of MUSIQUE
CONCRTE can employ digital recording techniques thereby demonstrating that
despite the shift from analogue to digital, Schaeffers basic precept of
working directly with sound material is still relevant.

THE TERM MUSIQUE CONCRTE
The words musique and concrte were carefully chosen by Schaeffer who
believed his project expanded the repertory of traditional musical
material. Moreover, his methods of scrutinizing and experimenting directly
with recorded sounds reversed established methods of composition.
Composition using notation illustrates traditional musical practices: the
written symbols represent values of pitch and duration which are written on
a score and performed by musicians. Additional symbols and words are
employed for dynamic levels, accents and instrumentation. By contrast,
Schaeffer asserted that sounds consist of many characteristics that resist
representation by notation. These characteristics can nevertheless be
perceived and might be promoted to more prominent roles in articulating
structure and creating musical meaning. By working with notation as the
first step in composing music, such characteristics are mostly ignored,
albeit inadvertently, and are relegated to secondary attributes of sounds.
Schaeffer did not repudiate abstraction, therefore, but he believed new
musical values should emerge from working experimentally with sounds
themselves. Moreover, in some musical communities the term concrte has
regrettably become synonymous with real-world, leading to the mistaken
assumption that musique concrte involves the use of sounds retaining
strong anecdotal links to their sources. In fact, concrte has distinct
philosophical implications. Schaeffer proposed that a recorded sound object
should be evaluated by examining each of its perceptible constituent
components the totality of which constitute the sounds concrete
substance. Any recorded sound could be subjected to this process of
discovery by repeated, concentrated listening (called reduced listening)
and new musical values such as vibrato, texture or spectral evolution might
be abstracted to become the principal features of new musical languages.

The process of abstracting concrete qualities is not immediately obvious in
Schaeffers earliest compositions which often consisted of easily
identifiable sounds. The techniques of his new concrete approach to
composition were still rudimentary and, as a result, many sounds were left
untransformed. Schaeffers first MUSIQUE CONCRTE composition, the Etude
aux chemins de fer (1948) exemplifies this abstract/concrete problematic.
Schaeffer chose railway sounds because, like many sounds from physical
sources, they were rich and complex in dynamic behaviour and spectral
evolution and thus contained many potential values. Nevertheless, the
sounds often revealed clear references to their origins such as whistles,
steam engines and carriages moving along the track. Schaeffer did not
intend the listener to perceive a quasi-dramatic collage even though he
acknowledged the poetic nature of such works. Recognizable sounds can have
their own intrinsic beauty as well as creating networks of socially
constructed meanings. This type of language was exploited by Pierre Henry
(an early collaborator of Schaeffers). However, Schaeffers aim was
abstracting new values from recorded sounds and creating directional
structures rather than anecdotal reference. One passage in this Etude is
referred to by Schaeffer: () Ive managed to isolate a rhythm and
contrast it with itself in a different sound colour. Dark, light, dark,
light. () This makes it create a sort of identity for itself and repeating
it makes you forget its a train. (Schaeffer, 1952: 21). Consequently, by
juxtaposing sound objects different spectral qualities were revealed. This
characteristic was then abstracted by the listener to create a new musical
value and form a spectral melody appreciated as a musical structure in
itself. A search for causal origins was, therefore, unnecessary.

MUSIQUE CONCRTES LEGACY
In 1958 Schaeffer eventually abandoned the term MUSIQUE CONCRTE in favour
of the more general musique exprimentale. Nevertheless, the concrete
attitude prevails amongst many electroacoustic musicians today who continue
the Schaefferian method of recording sounds and playing with them in the
studio to discover their potential by experiment and perceptual
verification . Modern exponents are Franois Bayle, Denis Smalley, Francis
Dhomont, Bernard Parmegiani, Jonty Harrison. Each of these composers have
elaborated Schaeffers theories in their own personal compositional
practices as have musicians who play turntables or who sample sounds.
Thus, MUSIQUE CONCRTE continues to exert and influence contemporary
electroacoustic music languages.

References and further reading
Chion, M. (1983) Guide des Objets Sonores Paris: Editions Buchet/Chastel
(Chions Guide is a summary of Schaeffers Trait)
Schaeffer, P. (1952) A la recherche dune musique concrte Paris: Editions
du Seuil (This book is a journal by Schaeffer outlining the discovery of
MUSIQUE CONCRTE. The final section of the book sets out a concrete music
theory)
Schaeffer, P. (2012) In Search of a Concrete Music Berkeley: University of
California Press (trans. C.North, J.Dack) (An English translation of
Schaeffers book from 1952)
Schaeffer, P. (1966) Trait des objets musicaux Paris: Editions du Seuil
(The Trait has its origins in musique concrte but can be applied to
music in general)
Schaeffer, P. & Reibel, G. (1998) Solfge de lobjet sonore Paris: Ina-GRM
(This work contains audio examples of many concepts with a transcribed
commentary by Schaeffer. The original 1967 edition had the examples
recorded on a vinyl LP, this was re-issued with 3 CDs)
Schaeffer, P. (1967) La musique concrte Paris: Presses Universitaires de
France (An introductory text to the subject area of Musique Concrte)

List of works
Schaeffer, P. (1948) Cinq tudes de bruits Pierre Schaeffer - luvre
musicale (2010) ina editions 6027 (These five studies are the earliest
musique concrte compositions. The first tude is the Etude aux chemins de
fer)
Schaeffer, P. & Henry, P. (1950) Symphonie pour un homme seul Pierre
Schaeffer - luvre musicale (2010) ina editions 6028 (The Symphonie was an
early collaboration with Pierre Henry)
Schaeffer, P. (1958) Etude aux allures Pierre Schaeffer - luvre musicale
(2010) ina editions 6029 (This etude promotes allure, which is a
generalized vibrato, to the level of a musical value)
Schaeffer, P. (1959) Etude aux objets Pierre Schaeffer - luvre musicale
(2010) ina editions 6027 (there are five movements to this etude. The
sounds object are limited in number and are developed in the manner of
variations)
Henry, P. (1950-1952) Microphone bien tempr Pierre Henry - les annes
cinquante Philips 472204-2 (Henry developed his own unique musical
language. Nevertheless, this early work in seven movements can be
considered typical of MUSIQUE CONCRTE)



