Taylor & Francis – Encyclopedia of Modernism



About you

[Salutation]

Maria

[Middle name]

Ioniță



[Enter your biography]



Ryerson University



Your article

Ménilmontant (1925)

[Enter any variant forms of your headword – OPTIONAL]

Ménilmontant is a 38 minutes black and white avant-garde French film directed by Dimitri Kirsanoff. Its narrative develops solely through images and montage, without the support of sound or title cards. Ménilmontant tells the story of two young sisters who leave their country home in the wake of their parents’ brutal murder, and settle in the eponymous working class Parisian neighborhood where they fall prey to the ruthless seduction of a young man. The film is notable for its use of double exposure, the depiction of disorienting urban landscapes via very rapid cutting, as well as for the brutality of the opening and closing scenes.

Ménilmontant is a 38 minutes black and white avant-garde French film directed by Dimitri Kirsanoff. Its narrative develops solely through images and montage, without the support of sound or title cards. Ménilmontant tells the story of two young sisters who leave their country home in the wake of their parents’ brutal murder, and settle in the eponymous working class Parisian neighborhood where they fall prey to the ruthless seduction of a young man. The film is notable for its use of double exposure, the depiction of disorienting urban landscapes via very rapid cutting, as well as for the brutality of the opening and closing scenes. Ménilmontant’s enigmatic narrative and frenzied, anguished atmosphere leaves the motivation of the characters obscure. Richard Prouty (1996) interprets the film as a critique of the escapist mainstream melodramas popular during the 20s. But Kirsanoff argues that the film focuses on the assaultive experience of urban life that fragments both psyche and experience. So, Ménilmontant is ‘a film about desire, not pleasure’ (14) in which the traumatized characters seek unsuccessfully to regain a lost sense of innocence and completion.



Film Link

<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=v8oo2GJAq2A>

Further reading:

(Prouty)