Taylor & Francis – Encyclopedia of Modernism



About you

[Salutation]

Rea

[Middle name]

Amit



[Enter your biography]



Yale University



Your article

Nakahira, Kō (1926-1978)

[Enter any variant forms of your headword – OPTIONAL]

Nakahira Kō was a prolific and wide-ranging Japanese film director who, in his relatively short career, directed more than 40 feature length films. He began his career as an apprentice at the Shōchiku Studio, working as an assistant to such prominent directors as Kurosawa Akira and Kawashima Yūzō. He moved to Nikkatsu and his directorial debut, Kurutta kajitsu (Crazed Fruit, 1956), was one of the works known as Taiyōzoku (‘Sun Tribe’) films, that were adaptations of novels written by Shintarō Ishihara, and showcased rebellious youth. This film and others led critic and filmmaker, Ōshima Nagisa, to place Nakahira among the New Modernists of Japanese cinema, spotlighting in particular his experiments with narrative and cinematic form. Nakahira, however, was not always as radical in his filmmaking as the directors who would later form the ‘New Wave.’  He was also involved in mainstream cinema, writing and directing, for example, Kurenai no tsubasa (Crimson Wings) in 1958, a sensational blockbuster that became one of the decade’s biggest box-office successes. In the latter half of the 1960s, Nakahira became one of the early transnational directors of the postwar era, working in Hong Kong where he directed films for the Shaw Brothers Studio.

Nakahira Kō was a prolific and wide-ranging Japanese film director who, in his relatively short career, directed more than 40 feature length films. He began his career as an apprentice at the Shōchiku Studio, working as an assistant to such prominent directors as Kurosawa Akira and Kawashima Yūzō. He moved to Nikkatsu and his directorial debut, Kurutta kajitsu (Crazed Fruit, 1956), was one of the works known as Taiyōzoku (‘Sun Tribe’) films, that were adaptations of novels written by Shintarō Ishihara, and showcased rebellious youth. This film and others led critic and filmmaker, Ōshima Nagisa, to place Nakahira among the New Modernists of Japanese cinema, spotlighting in particular his experiments with narrative and cinematic form. Nakahira, however, was not always as radical in his filmmaking as the directors who would later form the ‘New Wave.’  He was also involved in mainstream cinema, writing and directing, for example, Kurenai no tsubasa (Crimson Wings) in 1958, a sensational blockbuster that became one of the decade’s biggest box-office successes. In the latter half of the 1960s, Nakahira became one of the early transnational directors of the postwar era, working in Hong Kong where he directed films for the Shaw Brothers Studio.



Selected Filmography:

Kurutta kajitsu [Crazed Fruit] (1956)

Kurenai no tsubasa [Crimson Wings] (1958)

Onna no uzu to fuchi to nagare [Whirlpool of Women] (1964)

Getsuyōbi no Yuka [Only on Mondays] (1964)

Kuang lian shi [Summer Heat] (1968)

Yami no naka no chimimōryō [A Soul to Devils] (1971)

Further reading:

(Raine)