
Nam June PAIK (1932-2006)

Nam June Paik was a Korean-born American artist who achieved international
notoriety for his destructive Neo-Dada activities and visionary aesthetic
experiments with electronic media. Born to a wealthy family in Seoul during
Japanese colonial rule, Paik took private music lessons throughout his
adolescence. After moving to Japan in 1951, he enrolled in the University
of Tokyo, where he studied music, aesthetics, and art history and graduated
with a thesis on the composer Arnold Schoenberg in 1956. In the late 1950s
and early 1960s, however, he turned away from the university setting to
associate himself with a network of progressive artists such as John Cage
and the Fluxus group. While studying in Germany in the late 1950s, Paik
began exploring electronic media as an art form. Yet, far from being
negative or polemical, Paiks attitude toward the televisual environment
was marked by a radical openness. He explored the aesthetic potential of
television and video in an all-encompassing way. Paiks exploration
encompassed manipulation of television signals or scan lines, videotape
production and television transmission, live satellite telecast and video
sculpture and environment. Yet Paik was by no means nave or conformist in
his approach, instead he hijacked broadcast signals, redressing one-way
communication and rechanneling energy into an alternative mode of
communication.

Sharing cross-disciplinary impulses and defiant gestures, Paiks
experiments with musical composition and performance art took the form of
iconoclasm. Etude for Piano Forte (1960), for example, featured Paik
playing a piece by Chopin and cutting off audience member John Cages
necktie, and in One for Violin Solo (1962) he destroyed the instrument. His
notoriety continued after moving to New York in 1964, reaching its peak in
his Opera Sextronique (1967), during which his performance collaborator
Charlotte Moorman was arrested for playing the cello topless. Paiks first
solo show Exposition of MusicElectronic Television in 1963 displayed
thirteen altered television sets, along with pianos which were later
destroyed by Joseph Beuys, signalling the beginning of his lifelong project
exploring the aesthetic potential of television and video.

      [pic]

      Nam June Paik, Magnet TV, 1965
http://whitney.org/Collection/NamJunePaik/8660aB

As a world renowned artist born in Korea, Paik became known to South Korean
artists and intellectuals as famous but suspiciously scandalous,
stimulating a desire towards international contemporaneity in some Korean
Happeners in the late 1960s. His fame spread nationwide in the 1980s when
he took part in two national events, the 1986 Asian Games and the 1988
Seoul Olympic Games, with his two satellite installations, Bye-Bye Kipling
(1986) and Wrap Around the World (1988).

Although living a transnational life until his death in 2006 in Miami, Paik
is regarded as the most representative artist in Korea, which is
corroborated by the fact that the National Museum of Modern and
Contemporary Art has offered its central rotunda for Paiks video
installation The More The Better (1988) composed of 1003 TV monitors since
its installation in 1988.
References and further reading
Hanhardt, John G., Ken Hakuta, and Nam June Paik. (2012) Nam June Paik:
Global Visionary. Washington, DC: Smithsonian American Art Museum.

Joselit, David. (2007) Feedback: Television Against Democracy. Cambridge,
Mass.: MIT Press.

Paik, Nam June, and Judson Rosebush. (1974) Nam June Paik: videa n
videology, 1959-1973. Syracuse, N.Y.: Everson Museum of Art.


