Taylor & Francis – Encyclopedia of Modernism



About you

[Salutation]

Charlotte

[Middle name]

Galloway



[Enter your biography]



[Enter the institution with which you are affiliated]



Your article

Nandakwang, Tawee (1925-91)

[Enter any variant forms of your headword – OPTIONAL]

Nandakwang was one of the pioneers of modern art in Thailand. Born in the Northern city of Lamphun he trained at Silpakorn University and also completed a diploma in painting at Academy of Fine Arts in Rome in 1961. Nandakwang established his reputation as a leading artist early in his career, winning numerous prizes in the 1950s. Work from this period was heavily influenced by Impressionism and Cubism, drawing on familiar subjects such as portraits, landscape scenes and still lifes. He settled into his own distinct style that demonstrated a close interest in techniques, each mark on the canvas being carefully considered.

Nandakwang was one of the pioneers of modern art in Thailand. Born in the Northern city of Lamphun he trained at Silpakorn University and also completed a diploma in painting at Academy of Fine Arts in Rome in 1961. Nandakwang established his reputation as a leading artist early in his career, winning numerous prizes in the 1950s. Work from this period was heavily influenced by Impressionism and Cubism, drawing on familiar subjects such as portraits, landscape scenes and still lifes. He settled into his own distinct style that demonstrated a close interest in techniques, each mark on the canvas being carefully considered. He had an affinity with the natural world and strived to recreate an aesthetic that did not mimic reality, but aimed to convey an emotional response to the scene. Flowers were not simply painted for their beauty, for example, but became vehicles for conveying the changing atmospheric qualities of light and weather through the day. Buddhism was also an influence and there is a reflective quality in his paintings that sees feeling and impression override any direct rendering of the subject. Nandakwang was well recognised for his innovation and skill, receiving several awards including the ASEAN Visual Arts (painting) award in 1990. His works are represented in Thai and international collections.

Further reading:

(Poshyananda)

(Rodboon)