
Nanyang Style

The Nanyang Style was a popular term associated with the paintings of a
group of migr Chinese artists working in then British Malaya (present day
Singapore and Malaysia) around the period 1930s-50s. It referred
particularly to works that possessed the following characteristics: an
experimental and syncretic approach to pictorial representation; the
deployment of Impressionist, Post-Impressionist, Fauvist and Cubist
elements with Chinese ink and brush compositional and pictorial techniques;
and the depiction of local subject matter such as indigenous peoples and
their environments. The key proponents of this style included Chen Chong
Swee, Georgette Chen, Liu Kang, Chen Wen Hsi, and Cheong Soo Pieng. These
artists who were also collectively called the Nanyang artists were
associated with the Nanyang Academy of Fine Arts (NAFA) either as teachers
or associates of teachers. The cultural identity of the artists as
ethnically-Chinese sojourners was frequently used to substantiate the
originality of the Nanyang Style. This term generally described an approach
to painting that reflected considerations unique to a group of Chinese
artists attempting to arrive at types of modern art production that were
linked to the place itself.
Nanyang style was attributed to the conscious efforts of migr artists in
search of an artistic and cultural identity defined in relation to the
Chinese conception of the South Seas region. Most interpretations take the
four Nanyang masters painting trip to Bali in 1952 as a watershed moment
that crystallised this search. The term was commonly associated with the
guiding vision of Lim Hak Tai, who advocated the cultivation of a Nanyang
(style) of art as early as 1950.
[pic]
Chen Chong Swee, Balinese Women, Oil, 1952, National Heritage Board
Collection, Singapore [Permissions to be obtained]
This term continued to incite much debate after the 1979 retrospective
exhibition entitled Pameran Retrospektif Pelukis-Pelukis Nanyang sponsored
by the National Museum of Art (Malaysia). It marked the first extant study
on the influence of members of the Academy as Nanyang artists on the
modernist art discourses of Singapore and Malaysia and on the explication
of the Nanyang Style as a local modern phenomenon. The ensuing debate
revolved around its definition and usage, as individuals from the art
communities of both Singapore and Malaysia applied the term to works by
artists with no connection to NAFA but which displayed similar
characteristics or, on the contrary, to any work by a NAFA graduate with
little adherence to the described characteristics.
As the developments of NAFA was a pivotal part of the shared art history of
Singapore and Malaysia, recent scholarly work on this subject has continued
to assess its historical significance in light of nationally prescribed
narratives of modern art in both countries. The term Nanyang Style
continued to be used in favour of the more politicised and culturally
irrelevant term, Malayan Style, which was prevalent in early vernacular
writings discussing the above works at least until the separation of
Singapore from the Federation of Malaysia in 1965. The Nanyang Style as a
historical movement also represented a modality of diasporic Chinese
modernity beyond Singapore and Malaysia, as some scholars have argued.
Nanyang Style continues to be deployed in contemporary art practice by
practitioners associated with NAFA or art schools started by NAFA alumni
under the rubric of a wider artistic movement Nanyangism as coined by the
school.
References and further reading
Hsu, M. ([1963] 1999) A brief history of Malayan art, trans. Lai Chee Kien.
Singapore: Millennium Books. (First published in Chinese, this is likely
the first book length account delineating the art history of Malaya. The
author discusses the works of the above artists in relation to Malayan
themes and as expressions of local color.)

Kwok, K. C. (1996) Channels and confluence: A history of Singapore art.
Singapore: Singapore Art Museum. (A full coloured publication launched in
conjunction with the inauguration of the Singapore Art Museum. It includes
a general discussion of the Nanyang school and the Nanyang Style as a
pillar of Singapore art.)

Low, Y. (2012) Remembering Nanyang Feng ge in ed. Majella Munro, Modern
Art Asia Issues 1-8, (UK: Enzoarts): 229-261. (The author presents a
critical discussion on the historical reality and its textual
representations with a close examination on the ensuing politicization of
the terms Malayan Style and Nanyang Style following the separation of
Singapore from the Federation of Malaysia.)

Mashadi, A. (2009) De-Nationalizing Nanyang Modernity CArts: Asian
contemporary art and culture, no. 2 (March-April 2008): 92-95. (The author
posits the development of Nanyang modernity as representative of a modality
of diasporic Chinese modernity beyond Singapore and Malaysia.)

Ong, I. L. (2007) Tradition and change: The eclectic artworks of the
Nanyang artists University of Malaya. (An unpublished Masters thesis that
sought to broaden the understanding of the Nanyang Style as the outcome
and solution to three distinct sets of artistic problems.)

Ooi, K. C. (2012) Nanyang Style: Bygone Dreams of Paradise? (Recent
Conversations with NAFA Alumni) in Imagining identities: Narratives in
Malaysian Art, Vol. 1 (Kuala Lumpur: Rogue Art), 71-76. (The author
discusses the relevance and subjective interpretations of the Nanyang
Style by NAFA alumni and local artists from Singapore and Malaysia).

Piyadasa, R. & Sabapathy, T.K (1979) Pameran Retrospektif Pelukis-Pelukis
Nanyang, Kuala Lumpur: National Museum of Art. (An influential exhibition
catalogue that provided the first extant study on the influence of the
academy and the Nanyang artists in the modernist art discourses of
Singapore and Malaysia.)
Sabapathy, T.K. (1983) Modern art in Singapore: Pioneers and Premises
Asian Culture, (Singapore: Singapore Society of Asian Studies). (The author
examines the innovations produced by the Nanyang artists as the fusion of
two traditions, the School of Paris and Chinese painting traditions.
Nanyang artists here are defined as individuals with shared attitudes
towards art activity and not synonymous with NAFA.)
Tan, M. K. (1997) The evolution of the Nanyang art style: A study in the
search for an artistic identity in Singapore, 1930-1960. Hong Kong
University of Science and Technology. (An unpublished Masters thesis that
sought to explain the origins and meaning of the Nanyang art style and its
salience in Singapore art history.)
Zhong, Yu. (2000) The history of Malaysian Chinese art, 1900-1965. Kuala
Lumpur: Chung Chen Sun Art & Design. (A historically-grounded publication,
written in Chinese, that reassesses the connection between the artistic and
cultural histories of migr Chinese and Malaysian Chinese.)


