Taylor & Francis – Encyclopedia of Modernism



About you

[Salutation]

Vijayakumar

M.

Boratti









[Enter the institution with which you are affiliated]



Your article

Navodaya, Kannada

[Enter any variant forms of your headword – OPTIONAL]

Navodaya (New Birth) Period, generally dated from 1900 to 1940s, refers to the beginning of modern Kannada literature, owing largely to the influence of Western education, literature, and modernity. Many Kannada scholars called it a period of renaissance in Kannada literature. These decades saw several writers taking on the responsibility of nurturing modern Kannada literature through translations from European languages. Poetry, short story, novel, drama, folklore, and criticism found new scope, shape, and meaning at this time, with poetry dominating the literary scene. Most of the writers active in the Navodaya were middle class, English-educated scholars. 



Navodaya (New Birth) Period, generally dated from 1900 to 1940s, refers to the beginning of modern Kannada literature, owing largely to the influence of Western education, literature, and modernity. Many Kannada scholars called it a period of renaissance in Kannada literature. These decades saw several writers taking on the responsibility of nurturing modern Kannada literature through translations from European languages. Poetry, short story, novel, drama, folklore, and criticism found new scope, shape, and meaning at this time, with poetry dominating the literary scene. Most of the writers active in the Navodaya were middle class, English-educated scholars. 

The literature of the Navodaya period shows a widespread interest in introducing Western literary genres into Kannada, a conscious effort to blend Kannada literary tradition with the western, and an eagerness to preserve and protect the local linguistic and literary traditions. Nationalism, democratic ideals, individualism, and liberal humanism have found strong expression in the literature of this period. Besides these universalist strands of thought, community concerns, and regionalism too shaped the literature of these times. Although the literary scene was dominated by Brahmins, this period also saw the emergence of several Shudra writers. The prominent litterateurs of this period are B. M. Shrikantaiah, Masti VenkateshIyengar, Kailasam, Kuvempu, D. V. Gundappa, F.G. Halakatti, Hanumante Gowda C., M.S. Puttanna, Chennappa Uttangi and D.R. Bendre.  





Timeline

Seeta Swayamvara (drama, 1901) by M.L. Shrikantesha Gowda

Maadiddunno Maharaya (novel, 1915) by M.S. Puttanna

Mankutimmana Kagga (poems, 1943) by D.V. Gundappa

Kannada Sahitya Sammelana (1915) held by Kannada Sahitya Parishat

Third Conference of Short Stories (1940)



Further reading:

Shivarama Karantha, Return to Earth, tr. Padma Ramachandra Sharma (Bangalore: Sahitya Akademi Centre for Translation, 2002).

Kuvempu (K. V. Puttappa), The House of Kanooru, trs. Ramachandra Sharma and Padma Ramachandra Sharma (New Delhi: Penguin India, 2000).

G. S. Amur, Essays on Modern Kannada Literature (Bangalore: Kannada Sahitya Academy, 2001).

G.H. Nayaka,  ed., Shatamanada Kannada Sahitya (Kannada literature of the Century) (Bangalore: Sri Raghavendra Prakashana, 2000).