
Nazi Modernism

NAZI MODERNISM is not a contradiction in terms, even if Nazi-era rhetoric
and propaganda directed against ENTARTETE KUNST powerfully suggested that
this was the case. Indeed, in addition to inaugurating a new style of
political leadership (borrowed from FASCIST MODERNISM) based on myths of
national regeneration and the exploitation of culture to achieve political
ends, National Socialism left its indelible aesthetic imprint everywhere
and became synonymous with all things new, technologically advanced, and
modern, including the invention of the first operational jet fighter and
ballistic missile, the Peoples Car, the first national highway system,
the Autobahn, and fashion and footwear innovations spearheaded by Hugo Boss
and the Dassler brothers, Adolf and Rudolf. Recent scholarship has
unearthed not only a wealth of modernist cultural activity deemed central
to Nazi ideology and self-representation in Germany and Nazi-occupied
Europe, but the work of leading scholars and curators has revealed dynamic
and surprising links between cultural production in Nazi Germany (1933-
1945) and Modernismnot only in the obvious areas like film, architecture,
and design, but also in the unexpected realms of music, painting, and
sculpture.

The appeal exerted by National Socialism over leading Modernist
intellectuals and artists can be charted across a spectrum of behavior that
ranges from mere self-serving flirtation with Nazism to overt and
enthusiastic collaboration with the cultural apparatus of the Nazi regime.

Nazi music
The ambivalence of Nazi tastemakers toward Modernism was never more
apparent than in the regimes relationship with Richard Strauss, the
leading German composer of the twentieth century, whose signature works
include Also Sprach Zarathustra (1896), Salome (1905), and Der
Rosenkavalier (1911), and Carl Orff, whose wildly popular Carmina Burana
(1937) was the most successful large-scale musical composition of the Nazi
era. Despite the existence of reservations on both sides (Joseph Goebbels
refers to Strauss as a decadent neurotic in his diary, while Strauss
considered Goebbels a pipsqueak), Strauss was appointed by Goebbels to
serve as the first president of the Reichsmusikkammer in 1933. Carmina
Burana reflected Orffs interest in medieval German poetry and, despite its
unusual rhythms, appealed to the Nazi predilection for an idealized, quasi-
mythical German past. The composers use of historical texts in a modernist
composition was, however, acceptable to the Nazis because Orffs innovative
technique was cast in a variation on Wagners Gesamtkunstwerk that he
called elementare Musik which was based on the unification of the arts.

Nazi film
The technically innovative Leni Riefenstahl (Triumph of the Will, 1935),
Veit Harlan (Jew Sss, 1940), and Josef von Bky (Mnchhausen, 1943)
belonged to the pool of talented filmmakers (that also included the
Hollywood directors Douglas Sirk and Fritz Lang before they emigrated in
the mid-1930s) who worked with the Film Department in Joseph Goebbelss
Ministry of Propaganda and the Peoples Enlightenment.

Nazi architecture and design
While the stripped, modernizing Neo-classicism of Paul Ludwig Troost and
Albert Speer has come to be emblematic of the representative buildings of
the Third Reich, Modernist architecture also played an important role in
the Nazi reconstruction of Germany. Indeed, the closure of the BAUHAUS
under pressure from the Nazi government during the directorship of MIES VAN
DER ROHE and the subsequent emigration of Mies and former director, WALTER
GROPIUS, to America have overshadowed the work of Bauhaus and other
Modernist architects, designers, and artists who remained in Germany and
accepted the patronage of the Nazi state and its cultural organs. Thus much
of the architectural output of the Nazi era was either directly inspired by
Bauhaus principles, such as in the bridges of the vast Autobahn network (to
which Mies himself submitted designs for bridges personally approved by
Hitler), or are distinctly modernist in design, such as the
Reichsluftfahrtministerium, which was designed by Ernst Sagebiel (who
apprenticed under ERICH MENDELSOHN), or the buildings and designs of
Sergius Ruegenberg, Eduard Walther, Gustav Hassenpflug, and Joost Schmidt.
The design features of Nazi advertising, furniture, and household objects
were also shaped by Bauhusler Herbert Bayer, Kurt Kranz, Hein Neuner, Otto
Rittwegen, Paul Wolff, Wilhelm Wagenfeld, Christian Dell, Wolfgang Tmpel,
and Grette Willers. Other prominent modernist architects who served the
regime included Paul Bonatz and Peter Behrens. The latter was an early and
outlawed Nazi Party member in Austria and the teacher of Gropius, Mies, and
Le Corbusier. Behrenss designs for the reconstruction of Berlin were
greatly admired by Adolf Hitler.

Nazi sculpture
Along with architecture and design, sculpture in the Third Reich was the
art form least distorted by Nazi proscriptions on ENTARTETE KUNST. The
leading sculptors of Nazi Germany were divided into two groupsthe older
generation of classicizing Modernists led by Georg Kolbe and Fritz Koelle,
and younger, more ideologically influenced sculptors led by Hitlers
favorites, Arno Breker and Josef Thorak. Despite Kolbes being one of
Germanys most decorated artists during the Nazi dictatorship, his
canonical status survived the war intact. The same cannot be said of Breker
and Thorak, whose careers will be forever associated with their work on
behalf of the Party, e.g., Thoraks sculptures for the German pavilion at
the 1939 Paris Exposition and Brekers sculptures for the New Reich
Chancellery.

Nazi painting
BAUHAUS artists Kurt Kranz and Wilhelm Wessel joined original members of
the NEUE SACHLICHKEIT, Christian Schad and Rudolf Schlichter, in continuing
their careers even after the 1937 attack on ENTARTETE KUNST. In order to
maintain a high degree of consensual participation in exhibitions, the Nazi
regime lowered the bar for showing in even the most prestigious art
exhibitions to mere membership in the Reichskammer der bildenden Knste.
Since all professional artists were obliged to join, this was an
essentially meaningless credential, except for a relatively small number of
artists purged for racial or political reasons. Thus Modernist artists who
continued to exhibit their work in Nazi Germany do not fit neatly into the
binary of collaboration or inner emigration. They comprise a group that
includes Georg Schrimpf, Franz Radziwill, Erwin Henning, Erich Glette, Tom
Hops, Rudolf Nerlinger, Oswald Poetzelberger, Leo von Knig, Werner Gilles,
Ernst Schumacher, Carl Schwalbach, Max Unold, Wolf Panizza, Willi Geiger,
Oskar Coester, and Carl Theodor Protzen. Still other dissident or even
degenerate artists who had been living under a de facto
Ausstellungsverbot found restrictions on their work were lifted with their
conscription into the Wehrmacht and their recruitment into combat art
units. A comparison of this latter kind of work with paintings exhibited in
the official Great German Art Exhibitions offers a glimpse behind the
curtain where the complex reality of artistic production in Nazi Germany is
visible. Here ambivalence towards Modernism was unconcealed and the
censorship or management of artistic production was improvised, chaotic,
and inconsistent.

Key reference works:
Jeffrey Herf, Reactionary Modernism: Technology, Culture, and Politics in
Weimar and the Third Reich (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1984).
Roger Griffin, Modernism and Fascism: The Sense of a Beginning under
Mussolini and Hitler (Houndmills, New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2007).
Irene Guenther, Nazi Chic? Fashioning Women in the Third Reich (Berg,
2004).
Sabine Hake, Popular Cinema of the Third Reich (Austin, TX: University of
Texas Press, 2001).
Lutz Koepnick, The Dark Mirror: German Cinema between Hitler and Hollywood
(Berkeley, Los Angeles: University of California Press, 2002).
Barbara Miller Lane, Architecture and Politics in Germany, 1918-1945
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1968).
Jonathan Petropoulos, The Faustian Bargain: The Art World in Nazi Germany
(New York: Oxford University Press, 2000).
James A. Van Dyke, Franz Radziwill and the Contradicitons of German Art
History, 1919-1945 (Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press, 2011).

