
Ngritude
The literary and cultural movement known as ngritude was begun in Paris in
1932 by black students from French-speaking colonies in West Africa, the
Caribbean, and South America. The word ngritude, which literally means
negro-ness, expresses the value and depth of black culture and history,
as opposed to European, particularly French, culture. Its aesthetics drew
from other black-centric movements of the period, including the Harlem
Renaissance in the United States. The most prominent authors associated
with ngritude were Lopold Sdar Senghor (of Senegal), Lon Damas (of
French Guiana), Aim Csaire (of Martinique), and Birago Diop (of Senegal),
who wrote literature and political treatises that influenced their
contemporaries, as well as postcolonial writers. Some of the movements
founding members, including Csaire and Senghor, held political offices in
their newly independent states in the post-World War II period.
Ngritudes foundations were deeply political. Though the word ngritude
was not used, the ideas propelling the movement were first articulated in
the short-lived journal Lgitime Dfense (1932) [Rightful vindication, or
Legitimate defense], which West Indian students published to assert their
opposition to French assimilationist policies. Such policies mandated that
colonial subjects should abandon their cultures of origin and acquire
French language and cultural mores, thereby elevating French culture above
those of their colonies. The writers rejected capitalism and Christianity;
they took instead surrealism and communism as their inspirations for a new
African-focused movement, which was influenced by the writings Freud, Marx,
Rimbaud, and Breton (see Kesteloot 15). Lgitime Dfense was succeeded by
Ltudiant Noir (19341936; founded by Senghor, Damas, and Csaire). While
Lgitime Dfense was political in tone, the writings in Ltudiant Noir
focused instead on finding a single mystique for the entire black race
(Kennedy xvii). The textual and visual evidence of this search would shape
discussions of ngritude (and garner its most vehement criticism) until the
movement dissipated in the 1950s.
The first published usage of the term ngritude is found in Csaires
Cahier dun retour au pays natal (1939; Return to My Native Land, 1968),
but definitions and mode of expression varied by author and by decade.
Senghor once defined ngritude as the cultural patrimony, the values, and
above all the spirit of Negro African civilization (qtd. in Kesteloot
102). Csaire, on the other hand, once put it as the awareness of being
black, the simple acknowledgment of a fact which implies the acceptance of
it, a taking charge of ones destiny as a black man, of ones history and
culture (qtd. in Kesteloot). Senghors poetry in particular communicated
these values and this spirit via a glorification of those aspects of
African culture that were most often dismissed by the West as backward or
uncivilized. Senghor often foregrounded imagery of the black body,
precolonial traditions and religion, traditional dance and instruments, and
the African (or Caribbean) landscape. Senghors poem, Black Woman,
epitomizes the aesthetic of ngritude, with its metaphor of black woman as
Africa, the erotic beauty of her black skin, and its formal and textual
emphasis on the rhythm and musicality of Africa. Csaires interpretation
and expression of ngritude in his surrealist poetry and Marxist political
treatises varies most widely from that of Senghor, since his writings focus
less on traditional African cultures and more on colonial and postcolonial
historical conditions. (See entry on Csaire.)
A later generation of postcolonial writers rejected ngritude because of
its lack of political exigencymost notably, Wole Soyinka, who famously
wrote that the tiger does not proclaim his tigritudehe pounces. In spite
of Soyinkas criticism, the writings of ngritude authors continue to
influence discussions of blackness in postcolonial literature and
criticism.
References.
Kennedy, Ellen Conroy. Translators Introduction. Black Writers in French.
By Lilyan Kesteloot.
      Washington, D.C.: Howard University Press, 1991. xiiixxix.
Kesteloot, Lilyan. Black Writers in French. Trans. Ellen Conroy Kennedy.
Washington, D.C.:
      Howard University Press, 1991.

