
Ivonne Santoyo-Orozco
Architectural Association School of Architecture

OGorman, Juan (1905-1982)

[pic]
Juan OGorman
http://www.revistacodigo.com/juan-o-gorman/

Perhaps the best way to understand the mexican architect and  painter,  Juan
OGorman, is through his self-portrait of 1950 in which he  depicts  himself
in  multiple  frames  corresponding  to  his  different  occupations.   Juan
OGorman was born in Mexico City of Irish  descent.  He  graduated  in  1927
from the School of Architecture of the  National  Autonomous  University  of
Mexico and began his  career  working  as  a  draftsman  in  the  studio  of
Obregn, Tarditi and Villagrn Garca  (1921-1925),  and  later  on,  as  an
architect for Carlos Obregn Santacilla (1925-1928). At a  very  early  age,
OGorman designed the first functionalist houses in Mexico (1929), the  most
representative of this being the House-Studio of Diego  Rivera  (1931).  For
him,  functionalism  was  to  be  understood  as  the  tendency  to   design
architecture as a work  of  engineering,  which  he  understood  as  maximum
efficiency and minimum maintenance.  However,  in  time  his  designs  moved
towards an organic formalism influenced by the work of Frank  Lloyd  Wright,
Antonio Gaud and Ferdinand  Cheval,  exemplified  most  explicitly  in  his
house-studio in San Jeronimo (1951). Around the same time, he also  designed
the Central Library of the National  Autonomous  University  Campus  in  the
south of Mexico City, a piece  that  can  be  considered  representative  of
OGormans various aesthetic interests: an efficently organised slab,  whose
massive 4000 sqm facade is a continuous stone and glass mozaic expressing  a
political and social history of Mexico. This shift was separated  by  around
10 years (1939-1949) in which OGorman grew  increasingly  critical  of  the
architecture profession, arguing  that  the  architects  of  his  time  were
becoming little more than businessmen. As such, he  distanced  himself  from
the profession to invest his time in painting.

As a painter, he worked closely with Antonio M. Ruiz and was  influenced  by
the painters  Franciso  Goitia,  Jos  Mara  Velasco,  Frida  Kahlo,  Diego
Rivera, Atl, Jose Clemente Orozco and David Alfaro Siquieros. His  paintings
are commonly situated either belonging to the school of mexican  realism  or
to what some have referred to as mexican renaissance. However,  amongst  the
various movements,  OGorman  developed  his  own  style.  His  most  common
subjects  were  landscapes,  portraits  and   historical   narratives.   His
landscapes were at times fantastic, and at other times realistic. They  seem
to capture traces of his observations during the few years of time he  spent
in Guanajuato as a child. His portraiture, apart from a selection  of  self-
portraits, mainly depicted his friends. And while OGorman  painted  a  huge
variety of historical narratives in his murals, he had a  particularly  keen
interest in interpreting the Mexican Independence, the Revolution  and  Pre-
Columbian culture.

Painting provided OGorman with a means by which  to  express  his  critical
insights in a more direct manner. He was a believer in social reform and  he
saw in his work a  medium  through  which  to  communicate  his  ideas.  Yet
OGormans views were at times controversial. For example, a  mural  located
in the old Mexico City airport entitled The Conquest of Air by Man  (1937)
was censored because the authorities argued that it  displayed  anti-fascist
sympathies as well as opposition to religious fanaticism. In spite of  this,
his work has been widely appreciated, and has  been  honoured  with  several
awards, among which is the National Prize for Arts (1972).


Selected Works:
1931.       House-Studio Diego Rivera in Mexico City.
1937.       The Conquest of Air by Man,  Mural  at  the  old  Mexico  City
airport.
1941.        The  History  of  Michoacan.  Mural  in   Library   Gertrudis
Bocanegra in Ptzcuaro, Michoacan, Mexico
1943.       Recuerdo de los remedios. Tempera Painting 50.5 x 75.8cm.
1950.       Self-portrait.
1951.       Central Library of the National Autonomous University Campus  in
the south of Mexico City (In collaboration  with  Gustavo  Saavedra  y  Juan
Martnez de Velasco).
1952.       OGormans house San Jeronimo, San Angel, Mexico City, Mexico
1960.       Retablo de la Independencia, Mural in the National  Museum  of
History at the Chapultepec Castle, Mexico City.
1965. Credit  transforms  Mexico.  Mural  in  the  International  Bank  in
Reforma, Mexico City.


References and further reading:
Luna Arroyo, Antonio. (1973)  Juan  OGorman:  Au-  tobiografa,  Antologa,
Juicios Crticos y Documen- tacin Exhaustiva sobre su  Obra,  Mexico  City:
Cuadernos Populares de Pintura Mexicana Moderna.
Rodrguez Prampolini,  Ida.  (1983)  Juan  OGorman,  arquitecto  y  pintor,
Mexico City: Universidad Nacional Autnoma de Mxico.
Guzmn  Urbiola,  Xavier  (2007)   Juan   OGorman:   Sus   Primeras   Casas
Funcionales, Mexico City: UNAM.


Visual Material:
[pic]
House-Studio Diego Rivera in Mexico City.
1931
http://www.archdaily.mx/46931/clasicos-de-arquitectura-museo-casa-estudio-
diego-rivera-y-frida-kahlo-juan-ogorman/

[pic]
Recuerdo de los remedios. Tempera Painting.
1943.
http://munal.mx/munal/?page_id=900&pza_id=3049

[pic]
Self-portrait
1950
http://www.conaculta.gob.mx/detalle-nota/?id=10764

[pic]
Central Library of the National Autonomous University Campus  in  the  south
of Mexico City.
1951
Copyright: Archivos de Arquitectos Mexicanos, UNAM
http://www.edgargonzalez.com/2010/02/01/mexico-moderno/

[pic]
OGormans house San Jeronimo, San Angel, Mexico City, Mexico.
1952
http://www.revistacodigo.com/juan-o-gorman/
