
GEORGIA OKEEFFE (1888-1887)

Georgia OKeeffe was one of the most important American  and  women  artists
of the twentieth century and a leading early abstract painter.  She is  most
famous for her synaesthetic, sensuously colored and  painterly  abstractions
and enlarged-close-ups of flowers done in the late-1910s and 1920s, and  her
paintings of animal bones done in 1930s and 1940s.
      OKeeffe was born on a farm near Sun Prairie, Wisconsin  in  1887  and
raised there and on a farm in Williamsburg, Virginia.  Her interest  in  art
developed as a child, when she received her first lessons from a  few  local
women artists.  In school, she was supposedly told by one  of  her  teachers
to make her still lifes bigger, an admonition that  had  a  lasting  impact,
and encouraged to carefully study the structure of flowers and  plants.   As
a young woman, she studied at the Art Institute of  Chicago,  at  the  Chase
Art School with William Merritt Chase and Kenyon Cox, and Teachers  College
of Columbia University with Arthur Wesley  Dow.   She  then  taught  art  in
colleges in South Carolina and Texas for several years in the 1910s.
      While in Texas, she created abstract watercolors on paper of views  of
the Panhandle such as Evening Star III (1916),  in  which  she  conveys  the
effects of light at sunset in a highly reductive  way,  using  three  colors
and a handful of brushstrokes.  She also did some purely abstract  works  in
watercolor and charcoal that vaguely suggest natural  forms  and  processes,
such as her two versions of Blue II (both 1916)  and  a  group  of  abstract
charcoal drawings called Special.  Her early works  on  paper  came  to  the
attention of Alfred Stieglitz in 1916.  He was very impressed with them  and
quickly got to know her and exhibited her work in  his  New  York  City  art
gallery 291.  The two soon met, became lovers by 1918 and got  married  in
1924.  Since Stieglitz came from a wealthy family, OKeeffe settled  in  New
York City and no longer needed to teach to earn a living.
      By 1919, OKeeffe was working in oil on canvas and on a larger  scale.
 At this time, she did a number of pure  abstractions,  which  are  striking
for the rich harmonic colors, sensuous brushwork,  and  energetic  painterly
effects.  These include Blue and Green Music  (1919)  and  Music:  Pink  and
Blue I and II  (1920),  which  evoke  synaesthetic  emotive  responses,  the
transformation of solid and  diaphanous  forms  moving  through  space,  and
possible references to  the  female  sexual  anatomy.   In  the  1920s,  did
hundreds of paintings of all species  of  flowers  and  plants,  usually  as
enlarged close-ups that emphasize details or the abstract rhythms of  growth
and energy in natural forms.  Among the best known  are  Flower  Abstraction
and Red Canna (both 1924), Black Iris III (1926), Purple Petunia (1927)  and
Jack-in-the-Pulpit IV (1930).  The  critics  responded  rather  harshly  and
often dwelled on the sexual anatomy that  many  of  them  seemed  to  imply.
Although OKeeffe denied these works had  sexual  overtones,  some  of  them
unmistakably do, and these interpretations  were  helpful  for  establishing
her reputations and selling her works.
       In  the  late-1920s  and  1930s,  OKeeffes  paintings  became  more
representational as she responded to the broader trend  in  America  between
the World Wars to discard modernism  and  paint   subjects  that  celebrated
American technology, industry, morality, and  heritage.   Radiator  Building
(1927) reflects her response to the modern American  urban  environment  and
Precisionism.  In 1929, OKeeffe  made  her  first  extended  visit  to  New
Mexico, having briefly toured  the  West  when  she  lived  in  Texas  years
earlier.  She loved the Southwest and returned often over  the  next  twenty
years.  Her paintings  from  these  trips  include  numerous  depictions  of
Mexican penitent crosses on the desert landscape and, more famously,  animal
bones painted in careful detail or as large, close-up abstractions.   Rancho
de Taos Church and  Cows  Skull:  Red,  White  and  Blue  (both  1930)  and
PelvisRed and Yellow (1945) are among her  most  famous  paintings  of  the
1930s and 1940s.
      OKeeffe relocated permanently to New  Mexico  in  1949,  three  years
after Stieglitz died.  In her later years, she did abstracted views  of  the
mountains and desert of the Southwest, her adobe house,  and  animal  bones.
In the 1950s, she did large abstractions of clouds and the  linear  patterns
of rivers, all of which were inspired  by  aerial  views  made  possible  by
flying in  airplanes.   She  ceased  painting  around  1971  due  to  health
problems, including deteriorating vision.  She  died  in  Abiquiu  in  1987,
having become internationally  famous  and  receiving  numerous  awards  and
honors in the last years of her long life.

References and further reading:

www.georgiaokeeffemuseum.org

Cowart, John, et al. Georgia OKeeffe: Art and  Letters.  Washington,  D.C.:
National Gallery of Art, 1987.

Eldredge, Charles C. Georgia OKeeffe. New York: Abrams, 1991.

Fine, Ruth E., et al. OKeeffe on Paper.  New  York  and  Washington,  D.C.:
Abrams / National Gallery of Art, 2000.

Lisle, Laurie. Portrait of an  Artist:  A  Biography  of  Georgia  OKeeffe.
Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 1986. Rev. Ed.

Peters, Sarah Whitaker.  Becoming  OKeeffe:  The  Early  Years.  New  York:
Abbeville Press, 2001, rev. ed.

Robinson, Roxanne. Georgia OKeeffe: A Life. Hanover, NH:  University  Press
of New England, 1999 Repr. (Originally published 1989)

