Taylor & Francis – Encyclopedia of Modernism



About you

[Salutation]

Thomas

Patrick

Pringle



[Enter your biography]



McGill University



Your article

Ophüls, Max (1902-1957)

[Enter any variant forms of your headword – OPTIONAL]

Max Ophüls is an important critic and filmmaker of the post-war period, known for his opulent set design, kinetic long-takes, and proto-feminist melodramas, a source of inspiration for the French New Wave. Born into a family of wealthy Jewish textile-industrialists in Saarbrücken, Germany, the young stage director changed surnames from Oppenheimer to Ophüls to spare his relatives the shame of his pursuing a career in the arts. He directed five films in Germany before fleeing to Paris after the burning of the Reichstag in 1933. He subsequently escaped Europe in 1941 and joined the Jewish émigré directors in Hollywood. After several years of unemployment, Ophüls directed his best-known American features: The Exile (1948) and Letter from an Unknown Woman (1948).

Max Ophüls is an important critic and filmmaker of the post-war period, known for his opulent set design, kinetic long-takes, and proto-feminist melodramas, a source of inspiration for the French New Wave. Born into a family of wealthy Jewish textile-industrialists in Saarbrücken, Germany, the young stage director changed surnames from Oppenheimer to Ophüls to spare his relatives the shame of his pursuing a career in the arts. He directed five films in Germany before fleeing to Paris after the burning of the Reichstag in 1933. He subsequently escaped Europe in 1941 and joined the Jewish émigré directors in Hollywood. After several years of unemployment, Ophüls directed his best-known American features: The Exile (1948) and Letter from an Unknown Woman (1948). Upon returning to France, Ophüls interviewed with two young Cahiers du Cinéma journalists while shooting The Earrings of Madame De… (1953): Jacques Rivette and François Truffaut. Ophüls took a particular interest in Truffaut, asking him to assist him on Lola Montes (1955) and encouraging the young cineaste to try his hand at direction. Truffaut would later mount an academic defense of Ophüls work. Ophüls died from heart disease in 1957. His son, Marcel Ophüls, is a noted documentary filmmaker.



File: Ophuls.jpg

Figure 1.

Source: http://explore.bfi.org.uk/4ce2b9f598c68



Further reading:

(Baecque and Toubiana)

(Bock and Bergfelder)

(Guérin)

(White)

(Willemen)