
Ophls, Max (1902-1957)

Thomas Patrick Pringle (McGill University)

Max Ophls is an important critic and filmmaker of the post-war period,
known for his opulent set design, kinetic long-takes, and proto-feminist
melodramas, a source of inspiration for the French New Wave. Born into a
family of wealthy Jewish textile-industrialists in Saarbrcken, Germany,
the young stage director changed surnames from Oppenheimer to Ophls to
spare his relatives the shame of his pursuing a career in the arts. He
directed five films in Germany before fleeing to Paris after the burning of
the Reichstag in 1933. He subsequently escaped Europe in 1941 and joined
the Jewish migr directors in Hollywood. After several years of
unemployment, Ophls directed his best-known American features: The Exile
(1948) and Letter from an Unknown Woman (1948). Upon returning to France,
Ophls interviewed with two young Cahiers du Cinma journalists while
shooting The Earrings of Madame De (1953): Jacques Rivette and Franois
Truffaut. Ophls took a particular interest in Truffaut, asking him to
assist him on Lola Montes (1955) and encouraging the young cineaste to try
his hand at direction. Truffaut would later mount an academic defense of
Ophls work. Ophls died from heart disease in 1957. His son, Marcel
Ophls, is a noted documentary filmmaker.

[pic]
Image source BFI: http://explore.bfi.org.uk/4ce2b9f598c68

The kinetic long-take in The Earrings of Madame De :
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9U_julmmUsE

Further Reading and References:

Top of Form

Baecque, Antoine , and Serge Toubiana. (1999)Truffaut: A Biography. New
York: Knopf.

Bock, Hans-Michael, and Tim Bergfelder. (2009)The Concise Cinegraph:
Encyclopaedia of German Cinema. New York: Berghahn Books.

Guerin, William K. (1998)Max Ophls. Paris: Cahiers du Cinema.

White, Susan M.The Cinema of Max Ophls: Magisterial Vision and the Figure
of Woman. (1995) New York: Columbia University Press.

Willemen, Paul. (1978)Ophls. London: British Film Institute.



Thomas Patrick Pringle
McGill University

Bottom of Form



