
Orientalism

Orientalism often refers to the sociological, historical, cultural and
anthropological study of the Orient: that which is East of the Occident
and includes lands spanning from Morocco to Japan. For the French and
British, the Orient is generally considered to simply include present-day
Turkey, Greece, the Middle East and North Africa and, for America, the
Orient encompasses the Far East. The term Orientalism, however, is
primarily used to describe the incorporation of aspects of these Eastern
cultures in Western art, literature and design, largely seen during the
late nineteenth to early twentieth centuries. Artists whose work largely
focused on Oriental subjects are often referred to as the Orientalists and
include Eugne Delacroix, Alphonse Etienne Dinet, Jean-Lon Grme, William
Holman-Hunt, John Frederick Lewis and the photographers Lehnert and
Landrock. Traces of Oriental themes can also be found later in the work of
twentieth century artists such as Henri Matisse, Pierre-Auguste Renoir and
Wassily Kandinsky. Orientalist artists predominantly depicted scenes of the
Arabian Desert, portraits of natives with Oriental artifacts and clothing,
the harem, odalisques and Oriental architecture. Broadly speaking, the
Orientalists represented the Orient as primitive yet opulent and in
contrast to the rational and enlightened West. Much of the scholarship
around, and definition of, Orientalism in the twentieth century is
indebted to Saids Orientalism (1977), which discusses why the West has
preconceived notions of the Orient (and primarily the peoples of the Middle
East).

The vogue for the Orient began as the French and British colonial empires
opened doors into these countries. Rumours of the Other flooded the West
and, as Victor Hugo stated in the preface to Les Orientales (1818), tout
le continent penche  lOrient  (the whole continent is gravitating
towards the Orient). A colourful palette of ideas of unknown cultures
began to form, and was used to paint an image of the Orient which soon
began to characterise it. Napoleon Bonapartes documentation of the Orient
in 1809-1822 set an assumed example for travellers to follow, accurately
relating their experiences. However, Said argues that, at most, the real
Orient provoked a writer to his vision; it very rarely guided it.
Fantastical ideas of the Oriental Other quickly weaved into Europe and
established stereotypes which became deeply ingrained into Western thought,
remaining even today. Said maintains that celebrated writers of the
nineteenth century, such as Hugo, restructured the Orient by their art and
made its colours, lights, people visible through their images, rhythms, and
motifs.

Said sees Orientalism as the style of thought which polarises the The
East from The West. Said asserts that these places are not an inert fact
of nature, rather they are mere constructs both from and for the West. The
construct of the Orient in the nineteenth century, however, stimulated
many theories, works of literature, art and music commenting on the social
and cultural observations between these distinct binary opposites. Said
further defines Orientalism as a way of coming to terms with the Orient
that is based on the Orients special place in European Western
experience.



References and further reading

Lewis, R. (2004) Rethinking Orientalism, London: I.B. Tauris & Co. Ltd


Beaulieu, J. & M Roberts (eds)., (2002) Orientalisms Interlocutors:
Painting, Architecture, Photography, Durham and London: Duke University
Press
Said, E.W. (2003) Orientalism, London: Penguin

Nochlin, L. (1991) Politics of Vision, London: Thames and Hudson Ltd.

Hugo, V. (1828) Les Orientales, http://www.poetes.com/textes/hugo_or.pdf
(Accessed: 22 April 2013)

Thornton, L. (1994) The Orientalists: Painter-Travellers, Paris: ACR
PocheCouleur

Met Museum on Orientalism:
http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/euor/hd_euor.htm


Paratextual materials:

Edward Said interview on Orientalism :
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xwCOSkXR_Cw


Attached Image: Jean-Lon Grme The Snake Charmer (1870)
Location: Sterling and Francine Clark Art Institute at Williamstown, MA,
USA and perhaps the Wikipaintings link to help with copyright
(http://www.wikipaintings.org/en/jean-leon-gerome/the-snake-charmer)

