Taylor & Francis – Encyclopedia of Modernism



About you

[Salutation]

Nadia

[Middle name]

Radwan



[Enter your biography]



American University in Dubai



Your article

Osman, Ahmad (1907-1970)

[Enter any variant forms of your headword – OPTIONAL]

Ahmad Osman was a prominent Egyptian sculptor and decorator. He studied at the School of Decorative Arts in Cairo under the English painter and decorator William Arnold Stewart (1882-1953). After graduating in 1927, he received a scholarship to study at the Royal Academy of Fine Arts in Rome. When he returned to Egypt in 1933, he was appointed professor at the School of Applied Arts in Giza (former School of Decorative Arts). He worked as the director of the Sculpture Department at the School of Fine Arts in Cairo in 1937 before establishing the Faculty of Fine Arts in Alexandria where he became its first director in 1957. Osman was commissioned to sculpt and decorate several public monuments in Egypt. While his early sculptures employ characteristics of Italian classicism, his later works shifted to a more realistic style in depicting the features of the Egyptian peasants in their daily activities. 

	Ahmad Osman was a prominent Egyptian sculptor and decorator. He studied at the School of Decorative Arts in Cairo under the English painter and decorator William Arnold Stewart (1882-1953). After graduating in 1927, he received a scholarship to study at the Royal Academy of Fine Arts in Rome. When he returned to Egypt in 1933, he was appointed professor at the School of Applied Arts in Giza (former School of Decorative Arts). He worked as the director of the Sculpture Department at the School of Fine Arts in Cairo in 1937 before establishing the Faculty of Fine Arts in Alexandria where he became its first director in 1957. Osman was commissioned to sculpt and decorate several public monuments in Egypt. While his early sculptures employ characteristics of Italian classicism, his later works shifted to a more realistic style in depicting the features of the Egyptian peasants in their daily activities. 

Further reading:

(Iskandar, al-Mallākh and al-Shārūnī)



(al-Ṣadr)