
Osma (The Eight)

Osma (The Eight, 1907-1908) was a short-lived artist group in Prague that
made a pivotal contribution to the development of Expressionism in the
Czech lands (Bohemia and Moravia). Their paintings present a local variant
of the pan-European turn away from naturalism. The founding members of Osma
gradually replaced naturalism with a treatment of idiosyncratic line
invested with psychological intensity, color imbued with symbolic meaning,
and subjects derived from spiritual concerns. Emulating the existentialist
mood in Edvard Munchs paintings, which were exhibited in Prague in 1905,
they painted imagery that exposed the dissolution of belief in stability
prevalent among a populace weary of Habsburg rule. Ethnic, religious, and
class tensions visible in contemporary Prague often manifested in the art
world in the form of separate exhibition groups based on language. Outright
violence occasionally erupted between mobs of Czech- and German-speakers,
as the fissures in a decadent empire began to show. In contrast to this
divisiveness, however, Osma radically combined Czechs and Germans in its
membership.

Early exposure to Auguste Rodins sculpture and especially Munchs
paintings through exhibitions in Prague (1902 and 1905 respectively) set
the artists of Osma on their expressive trajectory. Reviews of these
exhibitions as well as commentaries on Paul Czannes art by Czech critics
and art historians were published in the Mnes Unions journal Voln Smry
(Free Directions) and had a decisive impact on the Osma group. To varying
degrees, Osma artists were interested in Arthur Schopenhauers philosophy;
Dostojevskys literature; Symbolist themes; Czech fin-de-sicle mood,
emotive directness of German Expressionism; colorism of French Fauvism; the
concepts of the primitive and primitivism; and the artists Frantiek
Kupka, Honor Daumier, Czanne, Vincent Van Gogh, Munch, Paul Gauguin, and
others. Many artists in the group maintained contacts with gallerists and
artists in Berlin, Vienna, and Paris and later facilitated valuable
connections for their Osma colleagues. Although Osma artists pursued
individual styles, they are united in their subjective use of line and
autonomous color laden with spiritual meaning. Subject matter
characteristic of Osmas imagery included self-portraits; portraits of
group members, their supporters, and their intellectual idols; landscapes
with Symbolic references; religious and mythological imagery updated with
modern psychological intensity; literary references; still lifes; peopled
city scenes; and genre scenes depicting modern lifes labor and amusements.
Compositions often echo those of Osmas heroes, such as Munch and Czanne.

Osmas first exhibition was held April 18  May 18, 1907, at Krlodvorsk
Street no. 16 in Prague. Artists exhibited included Otokar Kubn, Antonn
Prochzka, Bohumil Kubita, Emil Filla, Friedrich (Bedich) Feigl, Max
Horb, Willy (Vilm) Nowak and the student Emil Pittermann-Longen. Negative
reviews from mainstream critics in Prague were counteracted by Max Brods
laudatory essay Spring in Prague in the Berlin journal Die Gegenwart.
Osmas second exhibition was held June  July, 1908, at the Topi Salon in
Prague. Artists exhibited included Prochzka, Kubita, Filla, Vincenc
Bene, Feigl, Nowak, and Linka Scheithauerov. Again, negative reviews in
Pragues conservative art press beset the group, this time denouncing the
manipulation of naturalistic form as caricature. Even the progressive-
minded brothers Josef and Karel apek published a mixed response, which
criticized the paintings amorphous quality but praised the Osma artists
eye for color and light along with their ability to evoke the spiritual.
After their second and final exhibition as a group, the artists of Osma
carried on with their careers individually, many becoming prolific and
influential. In 1909 many of the artists of Osma joined the Mnes Union
(est. 1887) in Prague. Two years later some former Osma members (Bene,
Filla, Kubn, Kubita, Prochzka) seceeded from Mnes along with other
young artists. Many of these secessionists joined the newly founded Skupina
vtvarnch uml (The Group of Fine Artists, est. 1911; e.g. Bene, Filla,
Prochzka), while others chose to return to Mnes (e.g. Kubita).


Key Bibliographic Sources

Andl, Jaroslav, et al. Czech Modernism, 1900-1945, exh. cat. Houston
Museum of Fine Arts (Boston: Bulfinch Press, 1989).

Benson, Timothy O. and va Forgcs, eds. Between Worlds: A Sourcebook of
Central European Avant-Gardes, 1910-1930 (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press,
2002).

Lama, Miroslav. Osma a Skupina vtvarnch umc, 1907-1917 (Prague: Odeon,
1988).

Mansbach, Steven A. Modern Art in Eastern Europe: From the Baltic to the
Balkans, ca. 1890-1939 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999).

Padrta, Ji with Miroslav Lama. Osma a Skupina vtvarnch umc  1907-
1917: Teorie, Kritika, Polemika (Prague: Odeon, 1992).

Pomajzlov, Alena, ed. Expresionismus a esk Umn 1905-1927
[Expressionism and Czech Art] (Prague: Nrodn Galerie, 1994).


Relevant Websites

National Gallery in Prague, Collection of 19th and 20th-century art
http://www.ngprague.cz/en/5/sekce/veletrzni-palace/ (significant number of
works by Osma artists)

The Gallery of West Bohemia in Pilsen
http://www.zpc-galerie.cz/cs/collections (works by artists of Osma
generation)

Museum of Modern Art in Olomouc
http://www.olmuart.cz/MMU/ (works by artists of Osma generation)

Topi Salon in Prague
http://www.topicuvsalon.cz/index.php?option=com_content&view=category&layout
=blog&id=50&Itemid=89 (site of 2nd Osma exhibition, 1908)

History of S.V.U. Mnes (1887-2007)
http://www.svumanes.cz/ospolku.html (from a documentary exhibition; text by
Jindich Boeck, Lucie Gorov, and Vclav pale)


Suggested images

[pic] Bohumil Kubita, Promenade u Arna (Promenade on the Arno), 1907, oil
on canvas. Gallery of West Bohemia in Pilsen
Source: http://www.zpc-galerie.cz/cs/collections

[pic] Emil Filla, ten Dostojevskho (Reader of Dostojevsky), 1907, oil
on canvas. National Gallery, Prague.
Source: http://imageshack.us/photo/my-
images/507/fillaemilctenardostojevox4.jpg/

[pic] Antonn Prochzka, Cirkus (Circus), 1907-08 (shown at Osmas 2nd
exhibition). National Gallery, Prague.
Source: scanned from Lama, Miroslav. Osma a Skupina vtvarnch umc, 1907-
1917 (Prague: Odeon, 1988), pg. 83.

