
PAINLEV, Jean (20 November 1902- 2 July 1989)

Jean Painlev was a French scientist most famous for his documentary films
about science and the natural world.  He was the only son of French prime
minister Paul Painlev, himself a respected scientist.  The younger
Painlev studied physics, chemistry, and biology at the Sorbonne, but he
turned to filmmaking as a way of capturing aspects of scientific study that
were visible no other way.  His films were criticized by the French
scientific establishment, which distrusted the medium as a whole, but
beginning with ufs d'pinoche (The Sticklebacks Eggs: From Fertilization
to Hatching, 1928), Painlev built a corpus of documentary films that
attracted attention from intellectuals in other fields, including Marc
Chagall, Man Ray, and Georges Bataille.  Painlevs films found resonances
between science and surrealism through a panoply of trick shots, using
slow motion, whimsical music, and the patterns of nature to render the
natural world strange.  Painlev was politically progressive throughout his
life, and despite their ostensibly apolitical nature, Painlevs films are
often perceived to be commentaries on the human world in which he lived.
Painlev claimed he chose the subject of LHippocampe (The Seahorse, 1934)
because the male of the species bears the eggs, while Les Assassins deau
douce (Freshwater Assassins, 1947) depicts the brutality of life in a pond
that mirrors the brutality of the war France had just endured.  Painlev
was active in the creation and promotion of the Institute of Scientific
Cinema (ICS), which worked to promote science films, and he continued to
produce films into the 1980s.

Further reading:
Bellows, A.M. and McDougall, M. (eds.) (2001) Science is Fiction: The Films
of Jean Painlev, Cambridge: The MIT Press; San Francisco: Brico Press.

List of works:
ufs d'pinoche (The Sticklebacks Eggs: From Fertilization to Hatching,
1928)
LHippocampe (The Seahorse, 1934)
Les Assassins deau douce (Freshwater Assassins, 1947)

Paratextual material?
[Something from The Seahorse via new Criterion DVD]

Kendall Heitzman
University of Iowa

