Taylor & Francis – Encyclopedia of Modernism



About you

[Salutation]

Michela

[Middle name]

Russo



[Enter your biography]



Texas A&M University



Your article

Paisá

[Enter any variant forms of your headword – OPTIONAL]

Paisà (Paisan. Italy 1946, b/w, 124 m. Drama). Directed and produced by: Roberto Rossellini. Production: OFI, Foreign Film Production Inc., Capitani Film. Written by: Federico Fellini, Sergio Amidei and Roberto Rossellini. Music by: Renzo Rossellini. Cast: Episode I, Sicily - Carmela Sazio (Carmela) and Robert Van Loon (Joe); episode II, Naples - Dots M. Johnson (Joe) and Alfonsino Pasca (Pasquale); episode III, Rome - Maria Michi (Francesca) and Gar Moore (Fred); episode IV, Florence - Harriet White Medin (Harriet), Renzo Avanzo (Massimo) and Gianfranco Corsini (Marco); episode V, Romagna - William Tubbs (Captain Bill Martin); episode VI, Po River - Dale Edmonds (Dale) and Van Loel (German officer). 

Paisà (Paisan. Italy 1946, b/w, 124 m. Drama). Directed and produced by: Roberto Rossellini. Production: OFI, Foreign Film Production Inc., Capitani Film. Written by: Federico Fellini, Sergio Amidei and Roberto Rossellini. Music by: Renzo Rossellini. Cast: Episode I, Sicily - Carmela Sazio (Carmela) and Robert Van Loon (Joe); episode II, Naples - Dots M. Johnson (Joe) and Alfonsino Pasca (Pasquale); episode III, Rome - Maria Michi (Francesca) and Gar Moore (Fred); episode IV, Florence - Harriet White Medin (Harriet), Renzo Avanzo (Massimo) and Gianfranco Corsini (Marco); episode V, Romagna - William Tubbs (Captain Bill Martin); episode VI, Po River - Dale Edmonds (Dale) and Van Loel (German officer). 

With its six episodes independent from one other and taking place in six different Italian areas, Paisà is part of Rossellini’s neorealist trilogy, alongside Roma città aperta (1945) and Germania anno zero (1948). Paisà offers a snapshot of Italy at the end of World War II. In Sicily, a young girl fraternizes with an American soldier, but both will be shot by Germans. In Naples a young boy steals the boots of an American soldier, who ends up being moved by pity. In Rome, an American soldier doesn’t recognize in the prostitute he is with, the girl he loved. In Florence, an English nurse looks for the man she loves, Guido ("Lupo"), now a Resistance leader, and eventually discovers that he is dead. In Romagna, three American chaplains of different denominations find refuge in a monastery; the monks fast in the hope of converting the ‘heretics’. In the delta of the Po River, partisans and parachutists are victims of the Nazi’s fierceness.   

Further reading:

 (Bondanella)



(Gallagher)



(Wagstaff)