
Pasmore, Victor (1908  1998)

Born in Chesham, Surrey, in 1908, Victor Pasmore became one of the most
influential British abstract artists after the Second World War, although
prior to the war his paintings were representational and strongly
influenced by post-impressionism. Then in 1937 he co-founded the Euston
Road School of realist painting with Claude Rogers, Graham Bell and William
Coldstream. Soon after the war he began experimenting with abstraction and
by 1950 had abandoned realism for abstract works involving geometric
imagery. From 1951 to 1955, Pasmore was the central figure in the
Constructionist group of abstract artists, most of whom went on to pursue
lifetime careers in the broad constructivist tradition. He was appointed
Head of Painting at Durham University in 1953, and Consulting Director of
Urban Design for the New Town of Peterlee in 1954 where he designed the
modernist Apollo Pavilion. Later, he adopted a less geometric form of
abstraction. He represented Britain at the 1960 Venice Biennale, became a
Trustee of the Tate Gallery in 1963 and was elected a Royal Academician in
1983. He died in Malta in 1998, where he had been living since 1966.


Pasmores early work consisted mainly of landscapes and still lifes. He
soon gained a reputation as a talented young artist and had his first one-
man exhibition in London in 1933. Tentative pre-war experimentation in
abstraction proved unsatisfactory and instead, with the Euston Road school,
he turned to realistic depictions of everyday life. Pasmore taught at the
school, though Euston Road also became a loose knit group of some 30
artists who painted in a realist style. The school closed in 1939.

After the war, dissatisfied with all forms of representational painting, he
again explored abstraction, eventually deciding on a constructivist
approach, involving the building-up of an image by the assemblage of basic
geometric elements into an aesthetically satisfying whole. Pasmores
conversion to abstraction was described by Herbert Read as the most
revolutionary event in post-war British art. By 1951 he had established
contact with other like-minded artists (Kenneth and Mary Martin, Anthony
Hill, Robert Adams) and formed a group which became known as the
Constructionists. Pasmores growing reputation led to his senior
appointment at Durham University and as design consultant to Peterlee New
Town, where he advised on road layouts and house styles as well as
designing the Apollo Pavilion as a visual focus point in the town
landscape. His work with architects reflected his view at that time that
constructive abstract art contributed to a unity of purpose between
painting, sculpture and architecture.

In the years after his move to Malta in 1966 he gradually abandoned this
constructivist approach, ceased making three dimensional reliefs and
returned to painting and the production of screenprints which, while still
wholly abstract, displayed a more fluid and colourful imagery. He was,
though consistent throughout his long career in promoting the concept of
abstract imagery as deriving internally from the mind, rather than being
abstracted from the shapes and colours of nature.





List of key works


  1943. The Quiet River: the Thames at Chiswick, oil on canvas, Tate
   1950. Square Motif: Blue and Gold, oil on canvas, Tate
   1957. Abstract in White, Black, Indian red and Lilac, wood relief, Tate
   1963. Abstract in White, Green, Black, Blue, Red, Grey and Pink, perspex
         and
                 wood relief, Tate
   1970. Apollo Pavilion, Peterlee New Town
   1992. Space, Time and Four Dimensions, oil on board, Tate



References and Further Reading


Herbert Read in Brion, M., ed., Art Since 1945, New York, 1959

Grieve, Alastair, ed., Victor Pasmore, London, 2010
Grieve, A., Constructed Abstract Art in Britain, New Haven & London, 2005
Bowness A. and Lambertini L., Victor Pasmore, London, 1980





[pic]
Victor Pasmore, Abstract in White, Black, Indian red and Lilac, 1957,
painted wood, 106.7 x 116.8 cms, Tate

www.tate.org.uk/art/artworks/pasmore-abstract-in-white-black-indian-lilac-
t00166


