
Pedro Pramo (1955)

Pedro Pramo is Juan Rulfos only novel and  by  many  considered  his  most
important work, as well  as  one  of  the  main  creations  in  contemporary
literature in Mexico and worldwide. It has been translated  into  more  than
thirty languages.
Pedro Pramo  appeared  two  years  after  Rulfos  first  publication,  the
collection of short stories El Llano en llamas.  Rulfo  had  already  broken
significantly with Mexicos literary past in the latter work by exploring  a
style based on the meticulous  study  of  new  narrative  techniques  and  a
fictional oral language that could believably represent the  speech  of  the
Mexican peasant. Many  critics  kept  classifying  Rulfo  as  a  regionalist
writer due to  the  settings  and  themes  of  his  short  stories  but  the
appearance of Pedro Pramo left no doubt as to the universal nature  of  his
work. Some stories collected in  El  llano  en  llamas,  such  as  Luvina,
anticipated the narrative and structural complexity of the novel,  but  with
Pedro Pramo Rulfo  reached  a  dimension  unknown  until  then  in  Mexican
literature.
The novel, which  Rulfo  initially  intended  to  name  Los  murmullos  (The
Whispers), is the story of Juan Preciado, who is urged by his  dying  mother
to go to her birth town, Comala, to demand his  due  from  his  father,  the
cacique, or land baron, Pedro Pramo. In the  opening  of  the  story,  Juan
arrives in Comala, which since his mothers youth has  become  an  arid  and
silent place. The few people he meets seem to live in  a  past  governed  by
the power  and  ruthless  authority  of  Pedro  Pramo  or,  as  Juan  later
discovers, in a present in which they linger as ghosts. In fact,  thanks  to
an intricate  narrative  technique,  the  reader  discovers  about  half-way
through the novel that all the characters, including Juan Preciado  himself,
are dead souls haunting Comala  and  trying  to  find  peace.  But  as  some
critics point out, the novel is  first  and  foremost  the  story  of  Pedro
Pramos unhappy love for a woman, Susana  San  Juan,  and  his  attempt  to
quench his disappointment with power.
Juan Preciados narrative  voice  and  vision  of  the  present  Comala  are
interwoven with other voices that present visions of the fertile  Comala  of
the  past  in  a  fragmentary  and  kaleidoscopic  narrative,  where  scenes
alternate without transition.  The  whole  text  is  shaped  by  these  oral
narrative voices, or murmurs, and by the particular tone that pervades  both
Rulfos dialogues and narrative speech. His works  have  been  described  as
being profoundly narrational, since objective description is avoided at  all
times in favor of implications and allusions that  gradually  add  essential
elements to the plot and often undermine the readers interpretation of  the
text.
The social and historical context of the novel is  the  destruction  of  the
agricultural and semi-feudal community in Mexico in  the  late  XIX  century
and its transformation into  large  urbanized  centers  with  over-populated
cities. As Danny J. Anderson has argued, the  ghostly  atmosphere  in  Pedro
Pramo is representative of the disquieting presence of  a  dying  but  not
quite dead traditional Mexico (cf. Further reading below).
Scholars have focused on numerous aspects in Pedro  Pramo:  the  novel  has
been read as an allegory of national history and politics,  as  a  fantastic
tale hovering between  reality  and  illusion,  as  an  exploration  of  new
textual structures and narrative techniques, as  a  literary  recreation  of
Mexican orality, as a novel exploring  the  communication  between  man  and
nature (the silences of man and  nature),  or  as  a  modern  expression  of
universal myths and archetypes.



English translations
Juan Rulfo, Pedro Pramo, translated  by  Lysander  Kemp,  New  York:  Grove
Press, 1959.

Juan Rulfo, Pedro Pramo, translated by Margaret Sayers Peden with a
foreword by Susan Sontag, New York: Grove Press, 1994.


Further reading
Anderson, Danny J., Introduction to The Ghosts of Comala: Haunted Meaning
in Pedro Pramo, online:
https://www.utexas.edu/utpress/excerpts/rulped-intro.html

Leal, Luis. Juan Rulfo, Boston: Twayne Publishers, 1983.

Sommers, Joseph. After the Storm: Landmarks of the Modern Mexican Novel
(chapter on Juan Rulfo), Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 1968.


Zepeda, Jorge. Algunos lugares comunes sobre Pedro Pramo, online:
http://www.clubcultura.com/clubliteratura/clubescritores/juanrulfo/Lugares_c
omunes_sobre_Rulfo.pdf


Material on the net
Full text of PP and critical commentary/analysis (in Spanish):
http://www.pedroparamo.org/

Pedro Pramo. Carlos Velo. 1966. Complete film:
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h1iv3MWPyE8&feature=related


Section dedicated to Pedro Pramo on Rulfos official website:
http://www.clubcultura.com/clubliteratura/clubescritores/juanrulfo/rulfoescr
itor2.htm



