
POLITICS AND CINEMA

The relationship between politics and the cinema is probably one of the
most vexatious questions to have occupied the academic discipline of film
studies, and thinking on the cinema more broadly. In their landmark 1969
text Cinema/Ideology/Criticism, Cahiers du cinma editors Jean-Louis
Comolli and Jean Narboni declared that every film is political, but this
entry will focus on those works which explicitly seek an engagement with
political subject matter.

IMAGE CORNER IN WHEAT

      One of the earliest examples of such a film is D.W. Griffiths 1909
one-reeler A Corner in Wheat, a dramatised diatribe against wheat
speculation based on a Frank Norris novel, which was recognised at the time
as an argument, an editorial, an essay on a subject of deep interest to
all by a reviewer for the Dramatic Mirror. In the political arena,
however, Griffith is more well-known for The Birth of a Nation (1915),
which, in spite of its unprecedented popular success, drew controversy for
its glorification of the Ku Klux Klan and its racist depiction of Southern
blacks. Along with Leni Riefenstahls paeans to Nazi rule in Triumph des
Willens (Triumph of the Will, 1935) and Olympia (1936), Griffiths film has
thus gone down in history as a key example of the cinema being used for the
purposes of propagating a far-right political ideology.
      These examples, however, are significantly outnumbered by those films
whose authors are on the political left, whether Marxist, anarchist, social-
democrat, or more eclectically radical, and who have sought to use the
cinema for the purposes of transforming society in a progressive direction.
Impetus to this tendency was undoubtedly provided by the 1917 Russian
revolution, and Soviet filmmakers took encouragement from Lenins
apocryphal proclamation that The cinema is for us the most important of
all the arts. Sergei Eisensteins Bronenosets Po'tyomkin (Battleship
Potemkin, 1925) is one of the landmark works to come out of this period,
and its centrepiece sequence on the Odessa steps remains an iconic example
of left-wing artistic modernism. Eisenstein was also central to developing
a theory of intellectual montage which, in alignment with Marxist
dialectics, could, in his view, allow the cinema to achieve an expressive
potential on par with theoretical writing. While his projected adaptation
of Marxs Capital foundered, many of his ideas on montage were adopted and
repurposed by compatriots such as Dziga Vertov (Chelovek s kinoapparatom
[Man with a Movie Camera, 1929]), Vsevolod Pudovkin (Storm Over Asia
[Potomok Chingiskhana, 1928]) and Alexander Dovzhenko (Zemlya [Earth,
1930]). In the 1930s, however, with the consolidation of Stalinist power
and the advent of sound film, Soviet montage cinema was sidelined in favour
of the official artistic doctrine of socialist realism.

CLIP BATTLESHIP POTEMKIN

      During World War II, filmmakers were marshalled into making films for
propagandistic purposes on all sides, including in the United States.
Hollywood had by this stage become something of an ideological battleground
between left- and right-wing figures, with some, such as Nicholas Ray and
Elia Kazan, having developed their craft in leftist theatrical troupes
during the New Deal era. With the onset of the Cold War, however, many of
these figures were persecuted by McCarthys anti-communist witch hunt: the
most high profile among them, banned from working in the film industry,
were collectively known as the Hollywood 10.

IMAGE PAISA

      In Europe, meanwhile, post-war Italy was the site of one of the most
noteworthy movements in film history: neorealism. With works such as
Roberto Rossellinis Pais (1946), Luchino Viscontis La terra trema (1948)
and Vittorio De Sicas Ladri di biciclette (Bicycle Thieves, 1948), the
neorealists not only transformed received notions of film production (with
on location shooting, use of non-professional actors, and an aesthetic
featuring the frequent use of long-takes and shots in deep-focus), they
also treated contemporary political themes with a frankness and liberty
unrivalled in other countries at the time.
      By contrast, the nouvelle vague in 1950s France was initially
perceived as comparatively apolitical, or even rightwards-leaning. But this
overlooked the fact that the so-called left bank filmmakers (Alain
Resnais, Chris Marker and Agns Varda) had been making politically engaged
films since the early 1950s  albeit often in more marginalised practices
such as short films or essayistic documentaries  while right bank
directors such as Jacques Rivette and Jean-Luc Godard became more
explicitly radical in their own work over the course of the 1960s and
1970s, a tendency that was intensified after the events of May 1968 had
politically polarised the country. Godard, in particular, would embark on a
frenetic bout of militant filmmaking in the late 1960s and early 1970s, and
formed the Groupe Dziga Vertov with the Maoist activist Jean-Pierre
Gorin, a collaboration which would lead to the key film Tout va bien
(1972).

IMAGE TOUT VA BIEN

      Furthermore, the nouvelle vague served as a point of inspiration for
numerous new cinemas around the world in the 1960s and 1970s, which
featured a younger generation of filmmakers coming to terms with their
political environments. This dispersed movement would take hold on both
sides of the Iron Curtain, with the work of Alexander Kluge and Rainer
Werner Fassbinder in Germany, Pier Paolo Pasolini and Bernardo Bertolucci
in Italy, Miklos Jancs in Hungary and Jerzy Skolimowski in Poland of
particular note. Elsewhere, some of the most interesting work in this vein
was carried out in Japan, notably in films such as Oshima Nagisas Nihon no
yoru to kiri (Night and Fog in Japan, 1960), Yoshida Yoshishiges Erosu +
gyakusatsu (Eros + Massacre, 1968) or the more militant filmmaking of
Wakamatsu Koji and Adachi Masao, whose ties to far-left terrorist groups
would have a lasting impact on their uvres.
      A parallel process took place in the Third World, in a period which
saw the rise of the Non-Aligned Movement, and a plethora of newly-
independent nations struggling with the legacy of colonialism. Latin
America, in particular, witnessed the rise of a strain of political cinema
that blended an engagement in workers struggles and guerrilla movements
with the promulgation of a radically anti-imperialist ideology. Dubbed
third cinema in a key text by the Argentine filmmakers Fernando Solanas
and Octavio Getino (1969), who rejected both Hollywood and European art-
house cinema in equal measure, this tendency would come to be represented
by their film Hora de los Hornos ( Hour of the Furnaces, 1968), as well as
the work of Glauber Rocha in Brazil, Patricio Guzman in Chile, Santiago
Alvarez in Cuba, and numerous lesser-known filmmakers in Africa, south-east
Asia and the Middle East.
      Perhaps the most contentious issue concerning the relationship
between politics and cinema  at least from the perspective of the radical
left  has been the form/content debate. Briefly put, this debate pits
adherents of a viewpoint privileging the importance of a comprehensive
break with conventional norms in the formal structures of politically
radical films (often following models proposed by Bertolt Brecht for the
theatre), against those who emphasise the primacy of communicating a
progressive political message to the largest possible audience (an approach
exemplified in the work of Gillo Pontecorvo and Constantin Costa-Gavras).
Both perspectives have potential drawbacks: the former standpoint risks a
nullification of the potential for intelligible political discourse, while
the latter may lead to the reconstitution of the regressive formal
techniques of the dominant bourgeois cinema.
      In the wake of the student revolts of 1968, this dissension was
acutely intensified. In the world of filmmaking, the free experimentation
of Straub/Huillet, Philippe Garrel, Carmelo Bene or the New York
experimental scene was at odds with the agit-prop stance taken by more
expressly militant filmmaking groups. In film criticism, too, the dispute
was a palpable point of contention: journals such as Positif, Cahiers du
cinma and Cinthique in France, Screen in the UK and Filmkritik in West
Germany were embroiled in long-running theoretical feuds on the issue, an
avatar of which was the lengthy comparison of the films Coup pour coup
(Marin Karmitz, 1972) and Tout va bien in the pages of Cahiers du cinma
(Groupe Lou Sin, 1972). In the most extreme cases, such as Jean-Louis
Baudrys Ideological Effects of the Basic Cinematographic Apparatus,
published in Cinthique in 1969, interventions into these debates would
come close to condemning the very functioning of the cinema as being
inherently politically reactionary, but they would also prove to be
fundamental in the entrenchment of film studies in the academic sphere,
where the relationship between cinema and politics continues to be a
fertile source for discourse and debate.
      The strident polemics of the post-1968 period would markedly recede by
the 1980s, and, in tandem with broader geopolitical tendencies, a more
conservative, politically quiescent mood became prevalent in world cinema
during this period. While the auteurist model of political cinema
dominant for much of the twentieth century has not entirely subsided  and
can still be seen in the work of directors such as Ulrich Seidl, Pedro
Costa or Jia Zhang-ke  the most notable trend in politically engaged
filmmaking in the 2000s has been the rise of documentary cinema.
Undoubtedly the most high-profile figure in this respect is the American
filmmaker Michael Moore. Fusing a populist left-liberal political outlook
with a brand of humour honed in his earlier television series TV Nation and
The Awful Truth, Moores films Bowling for Columbine (2002) and Fahrenheit
9/11 (2004) attracted unprecedented box office returns for documentary
films. Awarded at both Cannes and the Oscars, they were nonetheless
critiqued on the left for unduly privileging entertainment value and mass-
appeal over rigorous political analysis.

IMAGE FAHRENHEIT 9/11


      While a number of, mostly North American, documentary filmmakers have
also gained access to widespread distribution in this period (with notable
figures including Errol Morris and Alex Gibney), the early twenty-first
century has also witnessed the explosion of the grassroots political
documentary. Aided by the greater accessibility of digital filmmaking
equipment, these low-budget films are disseminated via a multitude of
distribution channels  whether through niche theatrical runs, the global
film festival circuit, political campaign groups, or, increasingly, on
online video-sharing sites  and their intersection with contemporary
political events such as the Arab Spring has seen this phenomenon gain a
high level of media attention. In contrast to the debates that marked
politically radical cinema in earlier decades, this filmmaking tendency
has, with some exceptions (the work of Wang Bing, for instance), largely
abandoned formal experimentation in favour of the rapid and uncomplicated
communication of political messages.




Further reading:

Baudry, J-L. (1970) Ideological Effects of the Basic Cinematographic
Apparatus. In Narrative, Apparatus, Ideology: A Film Theory Reader, ed. P.
Rosen (1986). New York: Columbia University Press, 286-298.

Benjamin, W. (1939) The Work of Art in the Age of its Mechanical
Reproduction. In Illuminations, ed. H. Arendt (1968). New York: Schocken,
217-251.

Comolli, J-L. and Narboni, J. (1969) Cinema/Ideology/Criticism. In Screen
Reader 1, ed. S. Rohdie (1977). London: BFI, 2-11.

Eisenstein, S. (1947) Film Form. New York: Harcourt & Brace.

Groupe Lou Sin dintervention idologique (1969). Luttes de classe en
France: Deux films: Coup pour coup, Tout va bien, Cahiers du cinma
238-239: 5-25.

Jameson, F. (1995). The Geopolitical Aesthetic: Cinema and Space in the
World System. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.

Rodowick, D.N. (1993) The Crisis of Political Modernism. Berkeley:
University of California Press.

Solanas, F. and Getino, O. (1969) Towards a Third Cinema. In Movies and
Methods: An Anthology, ed. B. Nichols (1976). Berkeley: University of
California Press, 44-64.

Vertov, D. (1984) Kino-eye: The Writings of Dziga Vertov, ed. A. Michelson.
Berkeley: University of California Press.

Daniel Fairfax
Yale University

