
Precisionism                                                    498 Words

Precisionism was a modernist art movement during the 1920s and 1930s in the
United States in which painters produced a machine aesthetic by rendering
precise, geometrical forms in their works.  A group of American painters
that were originally called The Immaculates, the Precisionists celebrated
the new industrial landscape of skyscrapers, factories, bridges, and other
mechanized phenomena.  Although never a formalized school and working
without a manifesto, Precisionism reflected both the exciting dynamism of
the Roaring Twenties as well as the streamlined simplicity of the Great
Depression.  Their images produced an ambivalent attitude toward
mechanisation, at once praising its efficiency and condemning its
dehumanisation.  Appearing immediately after a host of other influential
modernist movements such as Cubism and Futurism, Precisionists merged the
impulse toward abstraction with a photographically realistic eye.  While no
artist worked exclusively as a Precisionist, there were several for whom it
was a formative style.  Perhaps the most prolific artists who produced
Precisionist works were Charles Sheeler, Charles Demuth, and Georgia
OKeeffe.  Together, these three painters and several others created a
distinctly American brand of imagery that was a celebration of nationhood
as much as a celebration of mechanization.

At its core, Precisionism was the logical extension of the modernist
movement in America that had been developing since the New York Armory Show
in 1913.  When Marcel Duchamp debuted his Nude Descending a Staircase, it
ushered in a new paradigm for artists, one that glorified the machine with
almost divine reverence.  As early as 1917, Sheeler and Demuth began
producing works that showed a severity of subject matter as well as style.
Coming off the heels of the chaos of World War I, many art historians
believe that the Precisionists emerged out of the desire for a return to
order, and during the 1920s Precisionist works were displayed in galleries
all around New York.  Reflecting the abstraction of the patterns of urban
geometry, these works portrayed unknown and anonymous views of the sides of
skyscrapers, large industrial plants like the River Rouge in Detroit, and
severe views of new steel bridges such as the George Washington and
Queensborough in New York. However, it would be misleading to characterize
Precisionism as exclusively urban.  In fact, works like Demuths My Egypt
(1927) and Sheelers Americana (1931) celebrated the vernacular and the
specificity of American rural material culture.  Particularly in the late
1920s and early 1930s, when the grips of the Great Depression began to
shift the United States away from its affinity for urbanism, Precisionist
painters also found rejuvenated national spirit in the grain silos and
handmade craftsmanship of country life.

References and further reading

Friedman, M. (1960) The Precisionist View in American Art.  Exhibition
Catalogue.  Minneapolis: Walker Art Center.

Harris, E., et al. (1994) Precisionism in America, 1915-1941: Reordering
Reality. Exhibition Catalogue.  New York: Abrams.

Lucic, K. (1991) Charles Sheeler and the Cult of the Machine. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.

Tsujimoto, K. (1982) Images of America: Precisionist Painting and Modern
Photography.  Seattle: University of Washington Press.


[pic]

Charles Sheeler
American Landscape
1930
Oil on canvas
61 x 78.8cm
Museum of Modern Art
New York

http://www.moma.org/collection_images/resized/086/w500h420/CRI_157086.jpg
