
Writer: Priyanka Basu

Primitivism
Primitivism in modern art designates a range of practices and accompanying
modes of thought that span the period from the mid-nineteenth to the mid-
twentieth century and cut across manifold artistic styles and groups. This
entry presents instances of primitivism from this period that are
representative of its features. Modern artistic primitivism refers, above
all, to the ways in which Western artists valorised and drew upon aspects
of so-called primitive art and cultures in their works, ideas, and
lifestyles. They employed selective formal and thematic elements that they
believed were characteristic of the arts and cultures of not only small-
scale, native, non-Western peoples, but also of larger-scale, more highly
organised non-Western societies, Western pre-Renaissance and non-classical
styles, and European vernacular means of expression. Even more frequently,
these artists freely intermixed such elements and invented others that
suited their conceptions of the primitive, generating hybrid forms and
cultural features. Primitivism was developed from mythology, philosophy,
travel writings, ethnography, literature, racial and cultural theory,
popular culture, and colonial propaganda. It was also generated by
encounters with artifacts and peoples in modern display venues, such as
museums and worlds fairs, and during travels. Modern artists carried out
primitivist practices as ways to oppose academic techniques and principles
and the cultural category of the civilised, with which the concept of and
visual attributes considered primitive necessarily coexist. Modern
artistic primitivism had a number of further interlinked purposes: cultural
rejuvenation, formal invention, the pursuit of greater expressiveness, as
well as bohemian and political provocation; it was also used as currency in
personal and artistic rivalries. Not least, it served the production of
identity in relation to others, as part of appropriative exercises of
power, and to oppose Western modernity and processes of modernisation. It
should be made clear that the category and traits considered
primitiveincluding primordial, natural, nave, crude, expressive,
sensual, decorative, as well as associated with vernacular craft and not
fine artare ones that describe the beliefs of the practitioners of
primitivism and not the cultures and objects to which these traits were
attributed.

Primitivism was bound up with a network of colonial, imperial, and
scholarly interests, and its practitioners often partook of racist,
misogynist, and stereotypical views of so-called primitive peoples.
Nevertheless, primitivism possessed powerful critical capacities and was a
method of grappling with modernitys contradictions: one the one hand, its
possibilities for personal freedom, lack of absolute stylistic norms, and
access to the cultures of others, and, on the other, its relentless
destruction of stable values and social forms, contingency, abstraction,
and commodification of all aspects of life.

Primitivisms Philosophical and Theoretical Background
Modern artistic primitivism drew from an extensive and complex history of
primitivist thinking in Western culture, from antiquity, to the primitivist
modes of thought developed in relation to the travel literature and
anthropological theory of the Age of Discovery and the Enlightenment, to
nineteenth-century exoticism and Orientalism. Previously, ancient
philosophers supposed that there existed both earlier and contemporary
primitive peoples who lived in harmony with nature and their own
impulses, as well as more savage primitive peoples who were able to
bear hardship and had few possessions (so-called soft and hard
primitivisms, respectively).

In the early modern period, a number of notions of the primitive were
formed in relation to the Western classical tradition governing European
art academies, as Frances Connelly has shown. Thus because classical and
academic ideals and techniques were associated with the powers of
intellectual reflection, primitive peoples and their artifacts were
thought to demonstrate enthrallment in sense experience. Moreover,
conceptions of primitive artistic production became intertwined with
ideas of decorative inventiveness. Primitivism was also nourished by
Enlightenment and Romantic thinkers preoccupation with the origins of
cultural institutions and human faculties, as well as by Romantic notions
of culture that valued cultures in their supposedly early states.

The fundamental notion that primitive peoples animate the external world
while modern scientific thought is capable of identifying physical forces
at the basis of its functioning is an important modern idea about the
primitive. This is also a conceptual division that generates modernitys
subject-object relationships. In the twentieth century, the self-aware
modern subject understands itself as distinct from nature and material
objects in the world, while spiritual beliefs, representations, and other
notions of connections between humans and the physical world are relegated
to the spheres of imagination, superstition, and culture.

The Primitive in Art and Design Theory and Mass Culture, circa 18501930

Nineteenth-century decorative arts reform laid important foundations for
primitivism in modern art. In his book The Grammar of Ornament (1856),
which gathered and illustrated examples of proper design principles from a
range of savage to historical cultures, the designer and reformer Owen
Jones (18091874) wrote that the urge to ornament was a primordial one and
that modern artists should recover pure design instincts. This was a
response to industrial developments that made possible the production of
highly ornamented but often poor-quality objects in popular historical
styles and in new, highly naturalistic ones. These material and
technological shifts occurred in conjunction with the rise of colonialisms
cultures of collecting and display and nationalist inter-European design
competition. These were important conditions for the discovery and embrace
of primitive arts.

Artists practicing primitivism around 1900 also drew from German-language
art theorys intense interest in artistic origins. Gottfried Sempers
(18031879) 18611863 Style in the Technical and Tectonic Arts initiated a
scholarly turn toward the origins of minor art forms, considered fossils
of early cultures, in order to counter historicism in design. While
historicist nineteenth-century design was criticised for industrially
reproducing a range of earlier and exotic styles in art, architecture, and
everyday objects, Sempers study of early forms offered a means of
remaining true to design principles considered fundamental and universal.
In addition, Sempers writing on jewelry moved freely between ancient
civilizations and contemporary primitive peoples, locating original
principles of ornamental order in such adornment.

Alois Riegls (18581905) 1890/1893 theorization of primordial artists
driven by an artistic will to produce non-instrumental, decorative forms
was conceived in the context of a debate about the origins of prehistoric
and primitive ornament. In this debate, currently living so-called
primitive peoples were considered remnants of or analogous to early or
prehistoric cultures, and their arts and cultures were deployed as evidence
of fundamental principles. Hence they were thought to provide a picture of
humanitys childhood (just as children were believed to recapitulate
humanitys developmental stages).

Recently discovered prehistoric artnaturalistic Paleolithic and
geometric Neolithic stylesseemed to indicate that the naturalistic and
abstract were two contradictory transhistorical modes. Many theorists
argued that the formers naturalism appeared prior to the development of
religious life and basic forms of conceptualization, while the latters
abstract forms were conceptual depictions of mental images. This material
was harnessed in a widespread discourse on artistic psychology and its
changing visual manifestations. Wilhelm Worringers (18811965) 1907
Abstraction and Empathy developed the notion of a primitive urge to
abstraction as fearful response to phenomenal flux, which resonated with
emerging forms of modernist abstraction.

In contrast to this preoccupation with the principles of primitive
ornament and design on the part of many thinkers, art historian Aby Warburg
(18661929) sought to understand relationships between man, nature, and the
cosmos in his (1895/1923) study of native cultures of the American
Southwest. Thereby, his work also imbued primitive symbols and rituals,
such as visual and architectural representations of the cosmos and
ceremonial dances, with significance. However, he also interpreted
contemporary primitive peoples as survivals (or vestiges), however
ruined, of early humanity. In this way, they were thought to embody traits
common to cultures at the beginning of a continuum from pagan or
primitive to modern society. This point speaks to the fundamentally
allochronic nature of primitivist discourses (in anthropologist Johannes
Fabians words), which posit that living primitive peoples exist outside
of progressive, historical time and are not coeval with modern Western
societies.

In response to such literature premised on the non-contemporaneity of so-
called primitive peoples, anthropologist Franz Boas (18581942) developed
alternative theories of the primitive in his book Primitive Art (1927).
In this book, he considers elements common to primitive and other arts in
a non-progressive frame of analysis. Having established the contemporaneity
and equal mental and technical capacities of so-called primitive peoples,
he viewed their arts as emerging in relationship to social and geographical
circumstances and to particular materials and techniques.

The study of primitive art by such scholars as discussed above provided
extra-historical beginnings for many disciplines, including art history,
which were in the process of institutionalization around the turn of the
twentieth century. In addition, the popular primitivism that permeated
Western European metropolises around 1900 was equally important to the
development of primitivism as this scholarly interest in the primitive.
Freak shows, circuses, worlds fairs, and other mass-cultural venues
displayed primitive peoples and artifacts, and artists drew as much from
these representations as they did from ethnographic museums and scholarly
and other literature. These scholarly and popular approaches to the
primitive combined with racial and cultural theories of this period that
buttressed colonialism and concomitant forms of class and gender oppression
to form modern artistic primitivism.

Realism, Impressionism, and Post-Impressionism
Embracing simplified, popular, nave, even crude formal qualities and
cultural references that defied academic artistic training and values was
critical to the styles and personas of modern artists beginning with
Realist Gustave Courbet (18191877) and proto-Impressionist Edouard Manet
(18321883). Their ally, the poet and critic Charles Baudelaire
(18211867), described the childlike, sickly, and intoxicated
characteristics of the painter of modern life, necessary counterparts to
his urbane sophistication. The former rendered him especially sensitive to
stimuli of the urban environment, able to see the world always anew.

Critics and artists connected with Impressionism and Post-Impressionism,
such as mile Zola (18401902), Paul Czanne (18391906), and Maurice Denis
(18701943), posited a modern artist whose sensorium directly interfaced
with the phenomenal world, bypassing forms of historical mediation and
trained imitation. This artists style was intentionally awkward, aiming to
produce art directly from his unique temperament and nature. These works
were distorted, and had unfinished qualities, relative to academic
painting. These retrogressive formal and rhetorical techniques were
decisive for modernist primitivist artists.

Critic Roger Frys (1866-1934) notion of Post-Impressionism propagated a
view that highlighted the immediacy of artistic imaginative life. He
suggested it was more sensually receptive than the habitual operations of
instrumental thought and asserted the necessity of unlearning the goal-
oriented deployment of the senses to achieve artistic sincerity. He
combined these ideas with theories of primitive and childrens art,
furthering the common notion that primitive peoples exemplified
humanitys early stages and children reiterated its development.

Paul Gauguin, Post-Impressionism, and Symbolism
The work and life of Symbolist Paul Gauguin (18481903) are often the
starting point of analyses of modernist primitivism, as they can be
considered primitivist formally and in terms of subject matter and
lifestyle. Just as Symbolist art scorned the material, contemporary world
and history, Gauguins art was decorative and abstracted, seeking the
ideal. He and fellow Post-Impressionist artist Vincent van Gogh (18531890)
plotted their flight from decadent European culture focusing their
fantasies on the South Seas. Their knowledge of exoticist and colonial
literature, art, and popular culture led them to believe they would find
respite from capitalist production and ownership structures there, a
primitive land of natural abundance, offering erotic delights and
artistic freedom.

Gauguin and similarly disposed artists had already sought primitive
culture in Brittany, France, in the late 1880s. In denial of the
modernization of Brittanys agriculture and the touristic re-invention of
its culture, Gauguin convinced himself that he discovered savage ways of
life in the seemingly unchanged dress and rituals of the Breton people and
the regions rural landscape. He continued this quest in Tahiti beginning
in 1890. However, in a pattern to be repeated by later artists, he found
this imagined primitive culture already endangered by European
encroachment upon his arrival. In his Tahitian works, Gauguins primitivism
was syncretic, his references not only to the art and myths of the South
Seas, but also pre-Renaissance Europe, the Far East, Southeast Asia, and
elsewhere.

Gauguins primitivism was partly a vehicle for sexual and racial fantasies.
In Tahiti, he sought to bolster his masculinity through his relationships
to young native women. His works often depicted these women alongside
children, and represented key primitivist elements: the feminine and the
childlike, which were identified with the historically and culturally
early. Gauguins carrying out of his primitivism and formal radicalism on
female bodies was a strategy common to modernist and avant-garde artistic
innovation.

However, Gauguins works also powerfully critiqued European culture (as the
scholar Stephen Eisenman has shown). Many of his works astutely represent
alternative Polynesian relationships between natural, human, and other
spheres, and give form to non-Western forms of beauty and poise. By means
of these works, he dreamedhowever naivelyof worlds outside of capitalist
forms of exploitation. During his later time in Tahiti, he participated in
anti-colonial resistance groups and engaged with alternative native
cultures.

Worpswede
In the 1890s and early 1900s, similar attempts to retreat from urban
culture took place in artists communities in Germany, for example, among
the Worpswede group. In recently unified Germany (as of 1871),
modernization took place later and more rapidly than in other Western
European countries, inspiring great anxiety and the development of both
progressive internationalisms and nationalistic and reactionary cultural
criticism fixated on relationships to nature and to peasant culture.
Theorists like Georg Simmel (1858-1918) examined modern, urban psychology
and its differences from that of traditional, rural communities. Many
Worpswede artists worked in realist or Symbolist-influenced styles, but the
work of Paula Modersohn-Becker (18761907) was allied with Post-
Impressionist techniques, also partaking of the idealization of peasants,
the feminine, and the natural. These artists works focused on the rural
landscape and the local peasantry, and their rustic themes and lifestyles
contributed to contemporary idealisations of the German character and its
closeness to nature.

Die Brcke, German Expressionism, and Dada
The artists of Die Brcke (the bridge) in Dresden, Germany practiced
primitivism in their Nietzschean quest to harmonize art and life and to
regenerate culture, beginning around 1905. This group of artists included
Ernst Ludwig Kirchner (18801938), Max Pechstein (18811955), Erich Heckel
(18801970), Emile Nolde (18671956), Fritz Bleyl (18801966), and Karl
Schmidt-Rotluff (18841976). The groups primitivism emerged from its
members immersion in the debates of the Jugendstil decorative arts reform
movement (the German branch of pan-European Art Nouveau) at the turn of the
twentieth century. In that context, early non-European arts and Western
pre-Renaissance styles were positively regarded for their usefulness in
dismantling historicism, academic art, and realism. Die Brcke artists
believed that primitive peoples instinctively developed artistic styles
and symbols appropriate to their cultures that expressed their
relationships to the world. These authentic styles seemed to them to be
embodied especially in primitive decorative everyday and religious
objects. In contrast, modern culture lacked such forms and instead imitated
past styles, leading to the production of art and craft objects that lacked
vitality. Along these lines, Die Brcke sought communal art forms and non-
commodified interactions between makers and consumers of objects.

Just as primitive arts seemed to exhibit unalienated work processes,
direct relationships to materials, and great expressiveness, Die Brcke
artists were drawn to mediums with primitive connotations, like crafts,
woodcarving, and woodcuts. Moreover, they extended Jugendstils efforts to
provoke spontaneous responses to nature and to infuse objects with spirit
by pursuing immediacy in their bohemian lifestyles, as well as in their
art.

Photographs staged in Die Brckes communal studio environments evidence
their lived primitivism. These studio environments include wall paintings,
curtains, and homemade furniture inspired by Palau decorative arts, Ajanta
cave paintings, and Indian temple sculpture, among other sources. Moreover,
Die Brckes primitivism was carried out in both urban and countryside
locales. On the one hand, in the circus and cabaret images that Die Brcke
produced around 1910, urban entertainment is intertwined with the interest
in primitive culture and lifestyles. Such popular entertainment venues
regularly made use of exotic themes and peoples, and the energetic figure
of the cabaret dancer linked the primitive and the modern in Die Brckes
works, as the scholar Jill Lloyd writes. On the other hand, their works
depicting excursions to the countryside were produced in the context of
German reform movements that sought remedies for the negative effects of
urban life, advocating a return to nature.

Even after the group resettled in Berlin, Kirchner sought out the
primordial sexuality of the metropolis in his series of streetwalker
paintings. In the teens, Expressionist (a category into which Die Brcke
and certain other German artists were incorporated around 1911) primitivism
was criticized by modern artists who believed that it evidenced a failure
to generate symbols for its own time (Max Beckmann, 18841950) and signaled
a retreat from the dynamic urban and technological themes and forms
appropriate to the present (Ludwig Meidner, 18841966). The members of
Zurich and Berlin Dada would sharpen this critique of Expressionisms
inwardness. Their own experiments in performance and abstract poetry of
19161917 referenced African tribal music and Oceanic masks, aiming to
induce regression and critique rationalized thought structures.

The Blaue Reiter and Russian Primitivism
Primitivism was also practiced by the Blaue Reiter (Blue Rider) group of
artists in Munich, Germany (who were also incorporated into the label of
German Expressionism). Their Blaue Reiter Almanac of 1912 focused on
European folk art freely mixed with non-Western so-called primitive arts.
In line with Worringers schema in Abstraction and Empathy, members argued
that they had spiritual affinities with primitive artists and thus drew
upon their art to aid in the renewal of a materialist European culture.
This justified their transitional deployment of folk and tribal forms,
despite their anti-historicism and anti-mimetic bent. In so doing, their
leader Wassily Kandinsky (18661944) brought aspects of the primitivism of
modern Russian artists like Natalia Goncharova (18811962), Mikhail
Larionov (18811964), and Kasimir Malevich (18791935), to Western Europe.
These Russian artists had aided in the rediscovery of their countrys folk
heritage. They engaged with icon paintings, peasant woodcuts, and other
popular forms, combining them with modern influences. Franz Marc
(18801916) of the Blaue Reiter embraced the role of the savage artist
with the task of renewing decadent European culture. August Macke
(18871914) of this group theorized that the cabaret, the cinema, and other
modern urban entertainments might take on the role of the rituals that
offered emotional release in earlier primitive cultures.

Fauvism and Henri Matisse
The Fauve group of painters that emerged around 1905 was led by Henri
Matisse (18691954), and included Andr Derain (18801954) and Maurice de
Vlaminck (18761958). They were so labeled, as wild beasts, for their use
of bright, non-naturalistic color, distortion, and for the crude and
expressive qualities of their works. The terms primitive, decorative,
and modern were conjoined in the discourse around their work. These
labels also connected some of the groups artists to anarchist politics and
others to contemporaneous movements that emphasized direct experiences of
nature and the expression of physical enjoyment (as Gill Perry has
written). Matisses work also partook of a classicizing primitivism by
referencing Arcadian themes. Around 1910, the positive association of
modernist painting with the decorative began to wane, until references to
the decorative gradually became pejorative.

Fauve artists began to work consciously in dialogue with African art around
1906, collecting African masks and other ethnographic objects, as would
Cubists and Surrealists. Certain conventions from these appeared in their
works. Matisse deliberately distorted forms and courted awkwardness in his
works, partly under the influence of African sculpture. He asserted that
his concerns were formal and pictorial, that is, internal to his paintings
and process-oriented, rather than directly with expressive or primitive
subject matter.

Matisse also produced a number of works that take up traditional
Orientalist motifs and figures during and after travels to North Africa
around 1910. These works were treated differently than academic Orientalist
painting by contemporary advocates of Matisse and more recently by certain
historians because they are not anecdotal and do not deploy other tropes
and techniques of academic Orientalist painting. Instead, they are highly
abstracted. However, this distinction upholds a practice of separating
formally innovative modern artists from the Orientalist and colonial
imaginary (as the scholar Roger Benjamin has shown).

Pablo Picasso and Cubism
Pablo Picassos (18811973) pre-Cubist work dated circa 1906 referenced the
simplified, expressive forms of archaic Iberian sculpture and its revival
in Spain in the 1880s and 1890s. Subsequently, Picasso developed Cubism
together with Georges Braque (18821963) between approximately 1907 and
1911. Influenced by the Fauves, Picasso collected and made references to
African sculpture in his proto-Cubist and early Cubist work to undermine
and overturn Western conventions of the figure and pictorial space, as well
as Western sexual ideals. This is famously the case in Picassos 1907
Demoiselles dAvignon. The facial features of the paintings glaring,
exhibitionist female figures, understood to be prostitutes based on
Picassos earlier studies for the work, are derived from aspects of Iberian
sculptures and Oceanic and African masks and figures recently encountered
at the Muse dEthnographie at the Palais de Trocadro. These figures
possessed connotations of excessive sexuality associated with non-Western
peoples, particularly women. They have also been interpreted as
representing Picassos own sexual anxieties and broader cultural fears of
womens changing status in modern society, as well as Picassos notions of
that time of the magical and apotropaic nature of African sculpture. In
Cubist works by Picasso after this time, the forms of African sculpture
offered means of formal simplification and experimentation. These African
forms, when juxtaposed with Western academic and other representational
codes, revealed the conventional, or arbitrary, nature of all
representational systems.

Cubist artists had links to and overlapped with French anarchist and left-
wing circles that opposed colonialism and strongly criticised colonial
policies and atrocities committed in Africa of which news arrived in France
in 1905 and 1906, as Patricia Leighten has shown. Despite these
oppositional contexts, Picassos early artistic deployment of African
sculpture reflects stereotypical contemporary views of Africa and the way
that even those opposed to colonial exploitation remained embedded in
conventional binaries of civilised and primitive.

In addition to its influence on the painting and  sculpture  of  Fauves  and
Cubists in the first decade of the  twentieth  century,  African  and  other
primitive sculpture had a great impact on the development  of  modern  art
more broadly beginning in the teens. As indicated by the work of the  Fauves
and  Cubists,  the  fascination  with  the  three-dimensional   primitive,
fetish,  or  totem,   superseded   the   interest   in   two-dimensional
primitive ornamental forms from different parts  of  the  world  that  had
dominated earlier  scholarship  and  art  concerned  with  the  primitive.
African and other  primitive  sculpture  would  greatly  influence  modern
sculpture,  including,  for  example  the  work   of   Constantin   Brancusi
(18761957). These influences included the folk arts of his native Romania.

Purism
Many modernist celebrations of modernity and the machine seemingly
antithetical to primitivism also partook of a kind of primitivism. Purism
was a strand of modern art started in 1918 in France by Amde Ozenfant
(18861966) and Le Corbusier (18871965) that continued through the mid-
1920s. Artists associated with Purism were swept up in the return to
order of post-WWI France. They celebrated both continuity with aspects of
Frances past and modern technology for the purpose of joining in the
effort to rebuild France after the war. In Fernand Lgers (1881-1955)
Purist works, figures made up of basic geometric shapes represent everyday
French people, including workers and artisans. They coexist harmoniously
with machines, machine-made objects, urban scenes, and nature. Lger tried
to create forms that were modern and primitive at the same time,
simplified, anonymous, machine-like figures and forms of modern people at
leisure. His simplified forms and conceptual approach were inspired by a
range of Western and non-Western arts that he considered primitive (for
him, this included aspects of classical art) and opposed the art of the
Renaissance.

Non-Western Primitivisms
The primitivisms of modernist artists of non-European or North American
origin from across the worldfor example, Diego Rivera (18861957) in
Mexico, Wilfredo Lam (Cuban, 19021982), associated with Surrealism, and
Indian artists like Amrita Sher-Gil (19131941)demonstrate how non-Western
artists also used primitivist approaches. Often, they were used to assert
and fashion national identities and national artistic idioms and to engage
in anti-colonial struggles. As Elaine OBrien has written, cultural
appropriation, including primitivism, was a key strategy of the
cosmopolitan artists who created global modern arts, in different locales
and circumstances and under conditions of urbanism and accelerating cross-
cultural exchange.

Surrealism
The Surrealist group of artists and thinkers, including their putative
leader Andr Breton (18961966), initially formed from Parisian Dada
groups, and, like Dada, their philosophies were based on a rejection of
Western rationality shaped by experiences of the horror of World War I.
They intertwined their primitivism with Freudian notions of the unconscious
and theories and practices of chance. They were well read in ethnographic
literature of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. This
literature was critical to their fascination with dreams, myth, magic, and
totemic objects. Sigmund Freuds (18561939) 1910 Totem and Taboo and
similar works bridged their interests in psychology and ethnography. The
Surrealists were interested not only in primitive art, but they also
sought out and provoked otherness in everyday urban life.

Surrealist artists collected a range of primitive artifacts from Oceania,
Africa, North America, and elsewhere. They displayed these in Surrealist
exhibitions alongside their artworks and other objects they collected,
including castoff objects. They drew upon the work of the contemporaneous
Institute of Ethnology at the University of Paris founded in 1925, led by
Marcel Mauss (18721950) and also including Lucien Lvy-Bruhl (18571939)
and other ethnographers. Surrealist practices were also contemporaneous
with a broader French and European craze for the exotic in the 1920s and
1930s, including for jazz and other aspects of African-American culture.

Surrealist artists who put these ideas into practice in various artistic
mediums also include Andr Masson (18961987), Max Ernst (18911976), and
Man Ray (18901976). There were also a number of dissident Surrealists who
broke from Brtons control and practiced hybrid ethnographic and literary
mediums. For example, Georges Batailles (18971962) journal Documents
regularly featured ethnographic themes. Associated German critic Carl
Einstein (1885-1940) rejected the evolutionary primitivisms of earlier
scholars and artists and engaged with primitive art in formal and
aesthetic terms.

Abstract Expressionism
Beginning around the mid-1940s, the group of American artists who came to
be known as the Abstract Expressionistsincluding Mark Rothko (19031970),
Adolph Gottlieb (19031974), Barnett Newman (19051970), and Jackson
Pollock (19121956)referenced the primitive and archaic in their
writings and art, claiming to have deep psychological affinities with
these. They were in synch with a popular discourse on the situation of
modern man (in Michael Lejas words) in the wake of world war, in the age
of atomic weapons. In this context, the primitive was a means by which to
come to terms with the effects of science, technology, and the atrocities
of recent history. These artists conceived of their art as expressing
universal truths about human experience. In carrying out their primitivism,
these artists used various means. For example, Rothko deployed mysterious
biomorphic shapes from a Surrealist idiom, and the pictograph was an
important form for Gottlieb.

Other Postwar Primitivisms
Other major post-WWII primitivisms included that of Art Brut, led by Jean
Dubuffet (19011985), and the COBRA group, led by Asger Jorn (19141973).

Art historian Heinrich Wlfflins (18641945) 1915 book Basic Principles of
Art History: The Problem of the Development of Style in Later Art was
structured around the contrast of styles. Instead of the unity of the
classical were the self-sufficient languages of Renaissance and the
Baroque art, signaling the rise of the historicist discipline of art
history. Even within this relativized schema, however, there was no proper
place for the pre-Renaissance primitive in conceptions of art and art
history, aside from its function as supplying origins. The problematic
concepts and practices of the primitive and primitivism continue to
challenge us.



References and further reading:

Ades, Dawn and Simon Baker, ed. Undercover Surrealism: Georges Bataille and
   DOCUMENTS.
Ames, Eric. The Sound of Evolution.
Antliff, Mark and Patricia Leighten. Cubism and Culture.
Benjamin, Roger. Matisse in Morocco: A Colonizing Aesthetic? Art in
   America. 156165, 211, 213.
Chave, Anna. New Encounters with Les Demoiselles d'Avignon: Gender, Race,
   and the Origins of Cubism. The Art Bulletin 76:4 (December 1994), 596-
   611.
Clifford, James. The Predicament of Culture: Twentieth-Century Art,
   Ethnography, Literature, and Art.
Connelly, Frances. The Sleep of Reason: Primitivism in Modern European Art
   and Aesthetics.
Craven, David. Diego Rivera: As Epic Modernist.
Dickerman, Leah. Zurich, in Dada: Zurich, Berlin, Hannover, Cologne, New
   York, Paris.
Eisenman, Stephen F. Gauguins Skirt.
---. Symbolism and the Dialectics of Retreat. In Nineteenth Century Art:
   A Critical History.
---. Paul Gauguin.
Errington, Shelly. The Death of Authentic Primitive Art and Other Tales of
   Progress.
Fabian, Johannes, with a new foreword by Matti Bunzl. Time and the Other:
   How Anthropology Makes its Object.
Flam, Jack, ed. Primitivism and Twentieth-Century Art: A Documentary
   History.
Foster, Hal. The Primitive Unconscious of Modern Art, October 34
   (Autumn 1985), 4570.
---. Primitive Scenes.
Franke, Anselm, ed. Animism, Vol. 1. Sternberg Press.
Goldwater, Robert. Primitivism in Modern Art.
Gray, Camilla, and Revised and Enlarged by Marian Burleigh-Motley. The
   Russian Experiment in Art, 18631922. World of Art. 1986 edition.
Grewe, Cordula. Die Schau des Fremden: Ausstellungskonzepte zwischen Kunst,
   Kommerz und Wissenschaft.
Halbertsma, Marlite. The Many Beginnings and the One End of World Art
   History in Germany, 19001933.
---. The Call of the Canon: Why Art History Cannot Do Without.
Herbert, Robert. From Millet to Lger: Essays in Social Art History.
Hiller, Susan, ed. The Myth of Primitivism: Perspectives on Art.
Kelly, Julia. Art, Ethnography, and the Life of Objects: Paris, c.
   19251935.
Kuper, Adam. The Invention of Primitive Society: Transformations of an
   Illusion.
Leighten, Patricia. The White Peril and Lart ngre: Picasso, Primitivism,
   and Anticolonialism.
Leja, Michael. Reframing Abstract Expressionism: Subjectivity and Painting
   in the 1940s.
Lloyd, Jill. German Expressionism: Primitivism and Modernity.
Long, Rose-Carol Washton, ed. German Expressionism: Documents from the End
   of the Wilhelmine Empire to the Rise of National Socialism.
Lovejoy, Arthur and George Boas. Primitivism and Related Ideas in
   Antiquity.
Mitter, Partha. The Triumph of Modernism: Indias Artists and the Avant-
   Garde, 19221947.
Nochlin, Linda. The Imaginary Orient in The Politics of Vision: Essays on
   Nineteenth-Century Art and Society.
OBrien, Elaine et al, ed. Modern Art in Africa, Asia, and Latin America:
   An Introduction to Global Modernisms.
Perry, Gill. Primitivism and the Modern. In Primitivism, Cubism,
   Abstraction: The Early Twentieth Century.
Ratnam, Niru. Surrealisms Other Side. In Varieties of Modernism.
Rhodes, Colin. Primitivism and Modern Art.
Rubin, William, ed. Primitivism in 20th Century Art: Affinity of the
   Tribal and the Modern. Vol 1 and 2.
Said, Edward. Orientalism.
Schapiro, Meyer. Courbet and Popular Imagery.
Shiff, Richard. Czanne and the End of Impressionism: A Study of the
   Theory, Technique and Critical Evaluation of Modern Art.
---. From Primitivist Phylogeny to Formalist Ontogeny: Roger Fry and
   Childrens Drawings. In Discovering Child Art: Essays on Childhood,
   Primitivism, and Modernism, ed. Jonathan Fineberg.
Solomon-Godeau, Abigail. Going Native: Paul Gauguin and the Invention of
   Primitivist Modernism, Art in America 77 (July 1989), 118129, 161.
Torgovnick, Marianna. Gone Primitive: Savage Intellects, Modern Lives.
Tythacott, Louise. Surrealism and the Exotic.

Primary Sources:
Aurier, G. Albert. Symbolism in Painting: Paul Gaugin.
Baudelaire, Charles. The Painter of Modern Life.
Boas, Franz. Primitive Art.
Einstein, Carl. Negro Sculpture.
Frazer, James. The Golden Bough.
Freud, Sigmund. Totem and Taboo.
Fry, Roger. Vision and Design.
Gauguin, Paul. Longing for the Tropics, Marquesan Art, and Life of a
Savage.
Jones, Owen. The Grammar of Ornament.
Kandinsky, Wassily. The Spiritual in Art.
Kandinsky, Wassily, August Macke, and Franz Marc. The Blaue Reiter Almanac.
Matisse, Henri. Notes of a Painter.
Picasso, Pablo. Discovery of African Art.
Riegl, Alois. Neuseelndische Kunst.
---. Problems of Style: Foundations for a History of Ornament.
Semper, Gottfried. Style in the Technical and Tectonic Arts; or, Practical
Aesthetics.
---. Concerning the Formal Principles of Ornament and Its Significance as
Artistic Symbol.
Tylor, E. B. Primitive Culture, Vol. 1 and 2.
Warburg, Aby M. Images from the Region of the Pueblo Indians of North
America.
Worringer, Wilhelm. Abstraction and Empathy.
---. Form in Gothic.
Zola, mile. Edouard Manet.
-----------------------
Illustration to Jones, Grammar of Ornament, 1856.



Illustration to Semper, Style, 1861-1863.



Illustration to Riegl, Problems of Style, 1893.



Illustration to Worringer, Form in Gothic, 1912.



Illustration to Warburg, Images from the Region of the Pueblo Indians of
North America, 1895/1923.



Illustration to Boas, Primitive Art, 1927.



Illustration to Fry, Childrens Art, 1917.



Gauguin, The Yellow Christ, 1889.



Gauguin, Where Do We Come From? What Are We? Where Are We Going? 1897.



Modersohn-Becker, Kneeling Mother and Child, 1907.



Kirchner, photograph of studio, c. 1911.



Kirchner, Bathers Throwing Reeds, 1909.



Kirchner, Acrobatic Dance, 1911.



Illustration, The Blaue Reiter Almanac, 1912.



Matisse, Seated Riffian, 1912.



Photograph of Picasso in his studio, 1908.



Picasso, Demoiselles dAvignon, 1907



Cartier-Bresson, photograph of Bretons studio, 1961.



Gottlieb, Alkahest of Paracelsus, 1945.





