
Writer: Priyanka Basu

Primitivism
Primitivism in the context of modern art refers to artistic practices,
including lifestyles and the development of personae, and accompanying
modes of thought. It refers above all to the ways in which a number of
artists and groups valorised and drew upon aspects of non-Western art and
culture, especially of tribal arts and societies, but also Eastern ones,
as well as Western non-classical art forms, including European folk arts.
They appropriated these as subject matter and as a fund of selective visual
characteristics and representational codes, treated synthetically in
opposition to academic techniques, and conceptually in opposition to the
category of the civilised. Primitivism was itself synthesised from a
combination of long-standing notions, prejudices, idealisations, from
mythology, philosophy, literature, travel writings, anthropological theory,
popular culture, colonial propaganda, and encounters with non-Western
artifacts and peoples, facilitated by colonialism. This giving-of-value and
appropriation of forms and subject matter was carried out for a number of
interlinked purposes, in the quest to overturn academic norms, in the
practice of modernist formal invention, in the pursuit of greater
expressiveness, for reasons of personal and artistic rivalry serving the
avant-garde logic of trumping past styles, bohemian provocation, identity-
production in relation to others, as part of appropriative exercises of
power, and, not least, as forms oppositional to Western modernity and
modernisation, and capitalist economic structures and relationships.

If primitivism colluded with a network of colonial, imperial, scientific,
and other discourses and interests and its practitioners partook of racist
and misogynist views of non-Europeans and non-urban peoples, it also
possessed critical capacities. It is useful to conceive of it as existing
at exactly this juncture, as a method, as Jill Lloyd has written, of
negotiating the contradictions and paradoxes of modernity itself, its
liberatory possibilities, as well as its relentless abstraction,
alienation, contingency, and destruction of past values and stable social
structures.

Primitivisms Philosophical and Theoretical Background
Modern artistic primitivism drew upon an extensive and complex history of
primitivist thinking in Western culture, from antiquity, to the primitivist
modes of thought developed in relationship to the travel literature and
anthropological theory of the Age of Discovery and the Enlightenment, to
nineteenth-century exoticism and Orientalism.

Already antique philosophers supposed that there had been early, or
primitive, less civilized peoples who lived during a golden age in harmony
with nature and their own impulses, without the restrictive conventions of
civilized life, or savage peoples who were able to bear hardship and
possessed few material goods. Modern artists imagined that life in
societies with ritualized forms of violence and open practices of sexuality
was superior to the internalized disciplinarity of modern cultures.
Moreover, they believed that primitive peoples organically developed
artistic styles and symbols suited to their cultures, that could express
their relationships to the world and that were embodied in non-commodified,
everyday, decorative, and religious objects, while modern culture lacked
these, and instead was reliant upon the imitation of past styles that led
to the production of deadened cultural forms. Different modernist
primitivisms emphasized particular aspects of these notions.
In the early modern period and Enlightenment, a number of notions of the
primitive were consolidated that were, as Frances Connelly has shown,
formed in relation to the values of the classical tradition, including that
primitive peoples were immersed in sense experience from which they were
incapable of abstracting, such a capacity increasing during the process of
cultural evolution. This sensual immersion was closely related to a notion
of primal poeisis and a capacity for uninhibited bodily and other forms of
expression, including mimicry, also limited by the course of civilization.
Moreover, the notion of primitive artistic production became intertwined
with the ornamental and the belief that primitive peoples were capable of
decorative ingenuity. Other forms associated with the primitive included
the hieroglyphic, the fetish, and the grotesque, as Connelly writes.
Primitive art as conceptual category encompassed such traits and forms
thought to be typical of early or primordial art production.

Primitivism was also nourished on Enlightenment thinkers preoccupation
with the origins of cultural institutions and human capacities and on
Romantic notions of culture that valued origins and cultural earliness.

The fundamental notion that primitive peoples animated the external world,
personifying natural powers, while modern scientific thought is capable of
identifying physical forces at the basis of the functioning of the natural
world was both a component of a set of ideas about the primitive and a
conceptual division that generated modernitys subject-object
relationships.

The Primitive in Art Theory and Mass Culture around 1900
Artists practicing primitivism in the late nineteenth and twentieth
centuries would draw in addition upon ideas generated by the intense
interest in artistic origins of German-speaking Kunstwissenschaft
(scientific art history), from ALOIS RIEGLs (1858-1905) writing on Maori
art and on ornament, to WILHELM WORRINGERs (1881-1965) 1908 Abstraction
and Empathy and other writings, a body of work that deserves consideration
in this context as modernist. RIEGLs 1890/1893 theorization of the
primordial artist driven by the artistic will to produce non-instrumental,
decorative forms, which he conceived in vigorous opposition to the
predominance of materialist theories propagated by archaeologists and
anthropologists debating the origins of prehistoric and primitive ornament,
would provide a touchstone for the discourse on primitive ornament and art,
setting the notion of artistic volition at its center. GOTTFRIED SEMPERs
(1803-1879) 18611863 Style had already initiated a scholarly turn toward
minor arts and their origins in order to counter historicism in
architecture and design. In addition, SEMPERs writing on jewelry freely
moved between historical, ancient civilizations and contemporary primitive
peoples, locating in primitive adornment original principles of ornamental
order and design.
Art historian ABY WARBURGs (1866-1929) thought sought to grasp deep
meanings about the relationship of man, nature, and the cosmos in primitive
art, giving place not only to ornament, but also to symbols and rituals.
Recognizing the contaminated state of so-called primitive culture in the
present, in its ruins in the American Southwest, he nevertheless deployed
the technique of interpreting contemporary living primitive peoples as
vestiges of early pagan humanity, as the embodiment of traits common to
early cultures outside of progressive historical time, at the beginning of
a continuum from pagan to modern culture.

It has been characteristic of cultural primitivism since antiquity to find
in currently living primitive peoples survivals of imagined chronologically
early peoples. This was the case in the late nineteenth and early twentieth
centuries, when prehistoric art was discovered and intensely debated, and
its two poles  naturalistic and geometric, corresponding to Worringers
empathetic and abstract modes  examined in scholarly and popular texts. It
is important to note that this study of primitive art  which ranged from
the prehistoric, to many other forms of the non-classical throughout art
history, to the art of contemporary peoples  provided extra-historical
beginnings and foundations for many disciplines in the process of
institutionalization at this time, from anthropology, to art history, to
comparative musicology, and others, discourses that accompanied and were
intertwined with practices and theories of modern art.

This goes to the fundamentally allochronic nature of primitivist
discourses, which posit that non-Western or non-industrialized, non-urban
cultures from the past and present exist outside of progressive, historical
time, and are not coeval with the peoples of Western industrialized
societies.

In response to this literature, anthropologist FRANZ BOAS (1858-1942)
theorized in his 1927 Primitive Art more benign understandings of the
primitive, extrapolating qualities believed to be common to primitive arts,
in a non-evolutionist frame of analysis, providing these with positive and
equal value with Western art forms.

Just as important as this scholarly interest was the popular mass-cultural
primitivism that permeated Western European metropolises in the late
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. Freak shows, circuses, Worlds
Fairs, museums, and other venues displayed primitive peoples and artifacts,
and artists drew as much on these as they did on ethnographic museums and
scholarly and other literature.
Modern artistic primitivism was generated in conjunction with these
histories and theories as well as with modern racial theories that
buttressed colonialism and its concomitant forms of class and gender
oppression.

Impressionism and Post-Impressionism
Deliberately regressive qualities and desires were crucial to forming the
persona of the modern artist that crossed artistic styles, even those that
did not engage with primitivist subject matter. CHARLES BAUDELAIRE (1821-
1867) wrote of the regressive, deliberately childlike, spiritually
convalescent, and intoxicated qualities that characterized the painter of
modern life, necessary counterparts to his moral subtlety, love of
incognito, and urbane sophistication. The former rendered him especially
sensitive to forms, colors, and other stimuli of the urban environment,
which he experienced as nervous shocks in an unmediated way, allowing him
to see the world always anew.

Critics and artists connected with IMPRESSIONISM AND POST-IMPRESSIONISM,
such as MILE ZOLA (1840-1902), PAUL CZANNE (1839-1906), and MAURICE DENIS
(1870-1943) further theorized a modern artist who could experience the
world directly, naively, bypassing forms of historical mediation and
trained academic imitation. This artist and his/her style were
intentionally awkward and primitive, aiming to produce art directly from
his/her unique temperament and from nature, without the processes of
modifying past visual sources, as academic training taught artists to do.
These works were distorted, flattened, and had unfinished qualities,
relative to academic painting. This mythology imagined a savage artist
whose sensorium directly interfaced with nature and who thus produced more
sincere and expressive works.

Critic ROGER FRYs (1866-1934) theorization of POST-IMPRESSIONISM
propagated this view of the immediacy of artistic imaginative life that was
more sensually receptive than the instinctual operations of everyday,
instrumental transactions, and even implied an unlearning of this goal-
oriented deployment of the senses. FRY combined these ideas with theories
of primitive and childrens art, furthering the common notion that the
former was comparable to the latter, primitives exemplifying the childhood
of humanity, and children recapitulating its development. He was also one
theorist of the recent notion that while the very earliest (Paleolithic)
arts were illusionistic, before the development of religious life and basic
forms of conceptualization, typical early and primitive arts that followed
immediately thereafter (Neolithic onwards) were conceptual depictions of
mental images and not imitative.

Paul Gauguin and Symbolism
The work and life of SYMBOLIST PAUL GAUGUIN (1848-1903) are often the
starting point of analyses of modernist primitivism. He and fellow POST-
IMPRESSIONIST artist VINCENT VAN GOGH (1853-1890) plotted their flight from
the avarice of modern European culture in southern France and imagined the
South Seas as the furthest horizon of this escape, based upon their
knowledge of exoticist and colonial literature, art, and popular culture.
They believed they would find refuge from European relations of production
and property and the decadence and hypocrisy of modern European society in
a primitive land of abundance, in harmony with nature, full of erotic
delights, and artistic freedom.

Gauguin and other similarly disposed artists had already sought primitive
culture in Europe, in Brittany, France, in the last years of the 1880s.
Here, Gauguin convinced himself that he discovered ancient and savage
ways of life, in the seemingly historical costumes of its people, communal
religious and other rituals, and seemingly unchanged rural landscape. He
was in denial of the rationalization of this regions agriculture and the
modern re-invention of its culture for touristic purposes, escaping the
conditions of modern, urban France. Just as SYMBOLIST art was non-mimetic
and scorned the material, contemporary world, history, and everyday life,
Gauguins artistic response was decorative and abstracted, seeking the
world of dreams, the archaic, and the ideal.

He continued this quest in Tahiti beginning in 1890, seeking a world of
easy abundance, outside of capitalist relations, and the pressures of
modernity, but found this imagined harmonious primitive culture already
endangered by European encroachment upon his arrival. Here too his
primitivism was profoundly contradictory, exploitative, and a vehicle of
retreat from modernity and of sexual and racist fantasies. As Stephen
Eisenman has argued, one part of Gauguins primitivism can be interpreted
as disingenuous, hackneyed, taking part in the imperialist and misogynist
beliefs that facilitated his travels and emigration to the South Pacific.
Here he sought to restore his endangered masculinity through easy access to
young native women, and his works focused on them and on children, the
feminine identified with the childlike and historically and culturally
early. Indeed, Gauguin would carry out his artistic primitivism and formal
radicalism on female bodies, a strategy common to modernist and avant-garde
artistic innovation.

But it can also be argued that many of his works and attitudes critiqued
Western European culture in powerful ways. Works including the late Where
Do We Come From? What Are We? Where are We Going? (1897) cannily represent
the different gender roles and relationships between natural and human,
profane and spiritual worlds, and dream and waking life of Polynesia. They
give form to non-Western forms of beauty and bodily poise, and dream,
however naively, of worlds outside of capitalist forms of exploitation. His
later works in Tahiti and the Marquesas used native language to oppose
colonial re-education attempts, and he also joined in anti-colonial
resistance movements and engaged with native sexual alternative cultures.
This work also represents the syncretic character of Gauguins primitivism,
his references not only to the art and myths of the South Seas, but also
pre-Renaissance Europe, the Far East and Southeast Asia, and elsewhere.

Worpswede
In the 1890s and early 1900s, such attempts to retreat from urban culture
to rural areas, integrated with peasant life, also took place in artists
communities in Germany, for example, among the WORPSWEDE group. In recently
unified Germany (as of 1871), modernization took place later and more
rapidly than in other Western European countries, inspiring great anxiety
and the development of both progressive internationalisms and nationalistic
and reactionary cultural criticism and a fixation on relationships to
nature and to peasant culture. Theorists like GEORG SIMMEL (1858-1918)
examined modern, urban psychology and its differences from that of
traditional rural communities. Many WORPSWEDE artists worked in a realist
style, inspired by developments in France, but the work of PAULA MODERSOHN-
BECKER (1876-1907) was more closely allied with POST-IMPRESSIONIST
techniques, also partaking of the idealization of peasants and the equating
of the primitive with the feminine and natural.

Die Brcke
The artists of DIE BRCKE (the bridge) in Dresden, Germany practiced
primitivism in their Nietzschean quest to harmonize art and life and to
regenerate culture, beginning around 1905. Using the work of ERNST LUDWIG
KIRCHER (1880-1938) as an example of this remarkable group of artists 
which also included MAX PECHSTEIN (1881-1955), ERICH HECKEL (1880-1970),
EMILE NOLDE (1867-1956), FRITZ BLEYL (1880-1966), and KARL SCHMIDT-ROTLUFF
(1884-1976)  we can understand how primitivism was a way of negotiating
modernity and its internal contradictions, its possibilities for personal
freedom and subjective development and simultaneous abstraction of all
aspects of life and personal relationships. On the other hand, it was
potentially regressive, a vehicle of withdrawal from modernity into
primitivist fantasies.

The groups primitivism emerged from its members training in architecture
and immersion in the debates of the JUGENDSTIL decorative arts reform
movement at the turn of the twentieth century. In that context, early non-
European arts along with Western pre-Renaissance styles were positively
regarded for their value in challenging historicism, academic art, and
realism. Longing for a lost unity between art and life, JUGENDSTIL and DIE
BRCKE sought new, meaningful communal art forms and symbols and non-
commodified forms of interaction between makers and consumers of objects.
Extending JUGENDSTILs seeking of immediate responses to nature and efforts
to infuse alienated objects with spirit, DIE BRCKE pursued immediacy in
their bohemian lifestyles and paintings, sculptures, and prints.

Just as important as their work in these fine art media are their communal
studio environments, in the photographs of which we can behold their lived
primitivism. These environments  with their wall paintings, curtains, and
homemade furniture inspired by Palau decorative arts, Ajanta cave
paintings, Indian temple sculpture, among other sources, are sometimes
bypassed by historians privileging what they believe is a formal
integration of primitive styles that succeeds an earlier, superficial
engagement with exotic subject matter and decoration. For our purposes,
both primitivisms will be treated as compelling forms.

In the circus and cabaret images that some of this group produced around
1910, images of urban entertainment were interlocked with the interest in
exotic and primitive art. These venues regularly made use of exotic themes
and peoples around this time, and the animated figure of the dancer linked
the primitive and the modern. Their prints and paintings of their stays in
the countryside around Dresden also contained forms rhyming with and
alluding to more directly primitivist works.

Even after the group resettled in Berlin, Kirchner sought out the
primordial sexuality that seemed to seethe beneath the surfaces of the
metropolis in his series of streetwalker paintings. Around this time,
however, Expressionist primitivism was criticized by other modern artists
who believed that it evidenced a failure to generate symbols for its own
time (MAX BECKMANN, 1884-1950) or signaled a retreat from the dynamic urban
and technological themes and forms appropriate to the present (LUDWIG
MEIDNER, 1884-1966).

The DIE BRCKE artists, incorporated into the broader label of
EXPRESSIONISM along with other artists and groups in Germany, were also
drawn to media with primitive connotations like woodcarving and woodcuts.
Two of their members  PECHSTEIN and NOLDE  would also travel to islands
in the Pacific in further phases of their primitivism.

The studio environments of the DIE BRCKE point us to decorative arts
reforms crucial relationship to primitivism in modern art. Designer and
reformer OWEN JONES (1809-1874) wrote in his Grammar of Ornament of 1856
that the urge to ornament was a primordial one, from which arts modern
artists should learn in order to recover their pure design instincts,
returning to a childlike condition. The historicist culture that made all
art and design of the past available for imitation and reproduction (in
print and three-dimensionally through industrial processes) in conjunction
with the cultures of collecting and display of colonialism and nationalist
inter-European design competition were important backdrops for primitivism
 for the discovery of primitive arts, as well as the embrace of these
because of the confusions of design in the age of Worlds Fairs.

The Blaue Reiter and Russian Primitivism
Another primitivism was practiced by the BLAUE REITER group of artists in
Munich, Germany. Their Blaue Reiter Almanac of 1912 focused on European
folk art, freely mixed with non-Western tribal arts. In line with
Worringers schema in Abstraction and Empathy, they argued that they had
spiritual affinities with primitive artists and thus drew upon their art to
aid in the renewal of a decadent and materialist European culture. This
justified their transitional deployment of such folk and tribal forms,
despite the anti-historicism and anti-mimetic bent of their theories. In
this, their leader WASSILY KANDINSKY (1866-1944) was bringing to Western
Europe aspects of the primitivism of modern Russian art, in its rediscovery
of its folk heritage, practiced especially by artists NATALIA GONCHAROVA
(1881-1962), MIKHAIL LARIONOV (1881-1964), and KASIMIR MALEVICH (1879-1935.
These artists engaged with icon paintings, peasant woodcuts, and other
popular forms, combining them influences from Fauve and Post-Impressionist
techniques. FRANZ MARC (1880-1916) of the BLAUE REITER embraced the role of
the savage artist whose task it was to renew decadent European culture.
AUGUST MACKE (1887-1914) of this group theorized that the cabaret, the
cinema, and other modern urban entertainments might take on the role of the
primitive rituals that offered emotional release in earlier tribal
cultures.

Fauvism
The FAUVE group of painters emerged around 1905, led by HENRI MATISSE (1869-
1954), and including ANDR DERAIN (1880-1954) and MAURICE de VLAMINCK (1876-
1958). They were so labeled, as wild beasts, for their use of bright, non-
naturalistic color, distortion, and for the crude and expressive qualities
of their works. Their modernist techniques were regarded as barbaric and
primitive by some critics, while others extolled these qualities. The
terms primitive, decorative, and modern were joined in the discourse
around their work.

Such labels also connected some of these artists to anarchist politics and
others to contemporaneous movements that emphasized direct experiences of
nature and the free expression of physical enjoyment. Matisses work also
partook of a classicized primitivism. The positive association of modernist
painting, especially primitivist, and the decorative began to be recast
around the end of the first decade of the twentieth century, gradually
becoming pejorative and associated exclusively with the applied arts.
The FAUVE artists began to work consciously in dialogue with African art,
collecting African masks and other ethnographic objects, as would CUBISTS
and SURREALISTS. Certain conventions from these appeared in their works.
Through the use of primitivizing distortions in his works, MATISSE tried to
draw attention to the specifically pictorial nature of his concerns. Their
interest in these objects was related to the re-exhibition of GAUGUINs
works at this time and to typical notions of the primitive in the broader
culture.

MATISSE also produced a number of works during and after travels to North
Africa in 1906 and 1912-1913. These take up traditional ORIENTALIST motifs
and figures. These works have been treated differently by contemporary
advocates of and subsequent historians of MATISSE because they are not
anecdotal and do not deploy other realist tropes and techniques of academic
Orientalist painting, and are instead highly abstracted. However, this
distinction is dubious (as Roger Benjamin has shown), and upholds, in
addition, a practice of maintaining a number of avant-garde artists whose
formal innovations seem to place them outside of the ordinary linkages of
Orientalist and primitivist artists with the colonial and imperialist
imaginary and its visual culture.

Cubism
CUBIST PABLO PICASSOs (1881-1973) primitivism had a number of phases. His
work around 1905 referenced the simplified forms of archaic Iberian
sculpture and its revival in Spain in the 1890s. Influenced by the FAUVES,
CUBISTS were drawn to African sculpture, while previously primarily two-
dimensional and ornamental forms had been of interest to art theorists and
primitivist artists. Picassos primitivist work sought to engage with
distorted forms perceived as ugly. African art was deployed in his works
to undermine Western conventions of the figure and of pictorial space. It
offered means of formal simplification and experimentation, in painting and
in sculpture. In his fellow Cubist GEORGES BRAQUEs (1882-1963) works, it
was used to question and juxtapose different representational codes.

In Picassos 1907 Demoiselles dAvignon, Western sexual ideals were
aggressively attacked. In this work, it is clear how primitivism was a mode
through which male modernist artists expressed their anxieties about modern
culture and the changing status of women within it, as well as an
aggressive mode of inter-artistic competition.

Art historians have shown the anti-colonialist aspects of CUBIST culture,
its links to anarchist and leftist opposition to colonialism, exhibiting
the contradictory possibilities of primitivism. While their deployment of
African sculpture reflects, in many ways, stereotypical contemporary views
of Africa, they can also be regarded as part of these oppositional
contexts.

Picassos work exemplifies historiographic dilemmas in the interpretation
of modernist primitivism. The important 1984 Primitivism and 20th
Century Art: Affinity of the Tribal and the Modern exhibition at MoMA
asserted a formalist reading of this art, using Picasso as its most
important example. It took to heart Picassos denials of influence by
primitive art, while denigrating other varieties of modernist primitivism
that engaged explicitly with primitive subject matter.

Purism
Many forms of modernist celebrations of the machine and speed also partook
of a kind of primitivism. For example, FERNAND LGER (French, 1881-1955)
tried to create forms that were modern and primitive at the same time,
anonymous machinic forms that seemed to be mythical figures of a future
society.

Non-Western Primitivisms
The primitivisms of modernist non-Western artists across the world, like
DAVID SIQUIEROS (1896-1974), DIEGO RIVERA (1886-1957), and FRIDA KAHLO
(1907-1954) in Mexico, artists in India like AMRITA SHER-GIL (1913-1941)
and SUNAYANI DEVI (1875-1962), demonstrate how non-Western artists utilized
primitivist tropes to assert and fashion national identities and to engage
in anti-colonial struggles.

Surrealism
Artists and thinkers associated with SURREALISM engaged with other
primitivisms, intertwining these with their primary preoccupations with
Freudian notions of the unconscious and theories and practices of chance.
SURREALISTS like ANDR BRETON (1896-1966) and associated thinkers
(including dissidents) GEORGES BATAILLE (1897-1962) and MICHEL LEIRIS (1901-
1990) were not only interested in primitive art, but also they attempted to
produce and sought otherness in everyday life and in European culture. They
collected many kinds of castoff everyday objects and primitive artifacts
and exhibited these together with Surrealist works. They drew upon the work
of the Institute of Ethnology founded in 1925 and led by MARCEL MAUSS (1872-
1950), and associated also with LUCIEN LVY-BRUHL (1857-1939) and PAUL
RIVET. Their early enthusiasm for the primitive coincided with the craze
for all things African in Paris, but they gravitated towards Oceanic and
other objects. BATAILLEs journal DOCUMENTS regularly included ethnographic
themes. Associated German critic CARL EINSTEIN (1885-1940) rejected the
evolutionary primitivisms of earlier scholars and artists and tried to
engage with primitive art in formal and aesthetic terms.
Abstract Expressionism
Beginning around the mid-1940s, the group of American artists who came to
be known as the ABSTRACT EXPRESSIONISTS  including MARK ROTHKO (1903-
1970), ADOLPH GOTTLIEB (1903-1974), BARNETT NEWMAN (1905-1970), and JACKSON
POLLOCK (1912-1956)  referenced primitive and archaic art and peoples in
their writings and art, claiming to have deep psychological affinities with
these. In this they were in synch with a popular discourse on the situation
of modern man in the wake of world war and in the age of atomic weapons.
As in earlier primitivisms, the primitive was a means by which to debate
the effects of science, technology, and material, objective culture. In the
U.S. at this time, it was also a figure through which to come to terms with
the atrocities of recent history, which seemed to reveal that primitive and
modern man lived in a continuum, with timeless reserves of cruelty and
barbarism, and accompanying responses of terror and fear.

Along these lines, these artists conceived of their art as meditations on
mans condition and relationship to the cosmos, expressing universal truths
about human experience. They deployed animated, mysterious biomorphic
shapes from a Surrealist idiom, referencing the unconscious and
psychological struggle, but also the hieroglyph was an important form for
them, especially for Gottlieb, before they were associated with heroic
gestural abstraction.

Other Postwar Primitivisms
Other major post-WWII primitivisms included that of ART BRUT, led by JEAN
DUBUFFET (1901-1985), and the COBRA group, led by ASGER JORN (1914-1973).

Art historian HEINRICH WLFFLINs 1915 Basic Principles of Art History: The
Problem of the Development of Style in Later Art was structured around the
contrast of styles. Instead of the unity of the classical were the self-
sufficient languages of Renaissance and the Baroque art, signaling the
rise of the historicist discipline of art history. Even within this
relativized schema, however, there was no proper place for the pre-
Renaissance primitive in conceptions of art and art history, aside from
its function as supplying origins. The problematic concepts and practices
of the primitive and primitivism continue to challenge us:



References and further reading:

Ades, Dawn and Simon Baker, ed. Undercover Surrealism: Georges Bataille and
   DOCUMENTS.
Ames, Eric. The Sound of Evolution.
Benjamin, Roger. Matisse in Morocco: A Colonizing Aesthetic? Art in
   America. 156165, 211, 213.
Chave, Anna. New Encounters with Les Demoiselles d'Avignon: Gender, Race,
   and the Origins of Cubism. The Art Bulletin 76:4 (December 1994), 596-
   611.
Clifford, James. The Predicament of Culture: Twentieth-Century Art,
   Ethnography, Literature, and Art.
Connelly, Frances. The Sleep of Reason: Primitivism in Modern European Art
   and Aesthetics.
Craven, David. Diego Rivera: As Epic Modernist.
Eisenman, Stephen F. Gauguins Skirt.
---. Symbolism and the Dialectics of Retreat. In Nineteenth Century Art:
   A Critical History.
---. Paul Gauguin.
Flam, Jack, ed. Primitivism and Twentieth-Century Art: A Documentary
   History.

Fleckner, Uwe. The Death of the Work of Art: Carl Einstein and the Berlin
   Museum of Ethnology. In Die Schau des Fremden: Ausstellungskonzepte
   zwischen Kunst, Kommerz und Wissenschaft, ed. Cordula Grewe.

Franke, Anselm. Animism, Volume 1.
Fabian, Johannes, with a new Foreword by Matti Bunzl. Time and the Other:
   How Anthropology Makes its Object.
Foster, Hal. 1903, in Art Since 1900, 6369.
---. The Primitive Unconscious of Modern Art, October 34 (Autumn 1985),
   45-70.
Goldwater, Robert. Primitivism in Modern Art.
Gray, Camilla, and Revised and Enlarged by Marian Burleigh-Motley. The
   Russian Experiment in Art, 18631922. World of Art. 1986 edition.
Herbert, Robert. Lger, the Renaissance, and Primitivism. In From
   Millet to Lger: Essays in Social Art History.
Kuper, Adam. The Invention of Primitive Society: Transformations of An
   Illusion.
Leighten, Patricia and Mark Antliff. Cubism and Culture.
Leja, Michael. Reframing Abstract Expressionism: Subjectivity and Painting
   in the 1940s.
Lloyd, Jill. German Expressionism: Primitivism and Modernity.
Lovejoy, Arthur and George Boas. Primitivism and Related Ideas in
   Antiquity.
Mitter, Partha. The Triumph of Modernism: Indias Artists and the Avant-
   Garde, 1922-1947.
Nochlin, Linda. The Imaginary Orient in The Politics of Vision: Essays on
   Nineteenth-Century Art and Society.
Perry, Gill. Primitivism and the Modern. In Primitivism, Cubism,
   Abstraction: The Early Twentieth Century.
Pollock, Griselda and Fred Orton. Les Donnes Bretonnantes: La Prairie de
   la Representation.
Rampley, Matthew. Anthropology at the Origins of Art History.
Rhodes, Colin. Primitivism and Modern Art.
Rubin, William, ed. Primitivism in 20th Century Art: Affinity of the
   Tribal and the Modern.
Said, Edward. Orientalism.
Shiff, Richard. Czanne and the End of Impressionism: A Study of the
   Theory, Technique and Critical Evaluation of Modern Art.
---. From Primitivist Phylogeny to Formalist Ontogeny: Roger Fry and
   Childrens Drawings. In Discovering Child Art: Essays on Childhood,
   Primitivism, and Modernism, ed. Jonathan Fineberg.
Solomon-Godeau, Abigail. Going Native: Paul Gauguin and the Invention of
   Primitivist Modernism, Art in America 77 (July 1989), 118-129, 161.
Tythacott, Louise. Surrealism and the Exotic.

Primary Sources:
Aurier, G. Albert. Symbolism in Painting: Paul Gaugin.
Baudelaire, Charles. The Painter of Modern Life.
Boas, Franz. Primitive Art.
Einstein, Carl. Negro Sculpture.
Frazer, James. The Golden Bough.
Freud, Sigmund. Totem and Taboo.
Fry, Roger. Vision and Design.
Gauguin, Paul. Longing for the Tropics, Marquesan Art, and Life of a
Savage.
Jones, Owen. The Grammar of Ornament.
Kandinsky, Wassily. The Spiritual in Art.
---, August Macke, and Franz Marc. The Blaue Reiter Almanac.
Riegl, Alois. Neuseelndische Kunst.
---. Problems of Style: Foundations for a History of Ornament.
Semper, Gottfried. Style in the Technical and Tectonic Arts; or, Practical
Aesthetics.
---. Concerning the Formal Principles of Ornament and Its Significance as
Artistic Symbol.
Tylor, E. B. Primitive Culture, Vol. 1 and 2.
Warburg, Aby M. Images from the Region of the Pueblo Indians of North
America.
Wlfflin, Heinrich. Principles of Art History: The Problem of the
   Development of Style in Later Art.
Worringer, Wilhelm. Abstraction and Empathy.
---. Form in Gothic.
Zola, mile. Edouard Manet.


-----------------------
Illustration to Semper, Style, 1861-1863.



Illustration to Riegl, Problems of Style, 1893.



Illustration to Warburg, Images from the Region of the Pueblo Indians of
North America, 1895/1923.



Illustration to Worringer, Form in Gothic, 1912.



Illustration to Boas, Primitive Art, 1927.



Illustration to Fry, Childrens Art, 1917.



Gauguin, The Yellow Christ, 1889.



Gauguin, Where Do We Come From? What Are We? Where Are We Going?, 1897.



Modersohn-Becker, Kneeling Mother and Child, 1907.



Kirchner, photograph of studio, c. 1911.



Kirchner, photograph of studio, c. 1911.



Kirchner, Acrobatic Dance, 1911.



Kirchner, Bathers Throwing Reeds, 1909.



Illustration to Jones, Grammar of Ornament, 1856.



Illustration, The Blaue Reiter Almanac, 1912.



Matisse, Seated Riffian, 1912.



Photograph of Picasso in his studio, 1908.



Picasso, Demoiselles dAvignon, 1907.



Cartier-Bresson, photograph of Bretons studio, 1961.



Gottlieb, Alkahest of Paracelsus, 1945.





