
Ivonne Santoyo-Orozco
Architectural Association School of Architecture


Ramrez Vzquez, Pedro (1919-2013)

[pic]
Pedro Ramrez Vzquez
http://www.inah.gob.mx/reportajes/6575-pedro-ramirez-el-arquitecto-que-
construyo-para-la-gente

Pedro  Ramrez  Vzquez  is  arguably   the   father   of   Mexican   modern
architecture. He studied at the  School  of  Architecture  of  the  National
Autonomous University of Mexico,  and  graduated  by  presenting  the  first
thesis on urbanism in Mexico (1943).  He  had  a  prolific  and  influential
career in his hometown, Mexico  City,  where  some  of  his  buildings  have
become landmarks of the capital, such as  National  Museum  of  Anthropology
(1964), the Aztec Stadium (1966), the New Basilica of Our Lady of  Guadalupe
(1975), the Chamber of Deputies San Lazaro Legislative Palace (1980),  among
others. In addition to a prestigious architecture career,  he  also  left  a
mark in  other  disciplines  such  as  industrial  design,  graphic  design,
politics, and academia. Departing from architect, he  created  a  series  of
sculptures and some pieces of furniture. He also contributed to the  graphic
design of the Olympic image of 1968.  As  a  statesman,  he  served  as  the
President of the Organising Committee of the Olympic Games  of  1968.  As  a
politician, he was given the office of the Secretary  of  Human  Settlements
and Public Works from 1976 to 1982 and other posts within the  Secretary  of
Education. As an academic, he taught composition and urban planning  at  the
National School of Architecture, and he was a founder and  first  Rector  of
the  Metropolitan  Autonomous  University.  Through  all  these  endeavours,
Ramrez Vzquez insisted that design  is  not  a  work  of  art,  it  is  a
service. [1]

Since  he  was  a  student  in  secondary  school,  history  had  become   a
fascination for Rmirez Vzquez. And, it was through history that  he  would
develop a passion for architecture. Particularly influenced by the  teaching
of the renowned poet Carlos Pellicer, his  world  history  teacher,  Rmirez
Vzquez discovered a crucial relation between cohabitation and history  that
motivated him to become an architect. Through this relation,  he  cultivated
an approach to design which aimed to display a nation  looking  towards  the
future,  but  without  forgetting  its  past.  His  architecture  could   be
described as responding to two historical sensibilities: european  modernism
and pre-columbian aesthetics.

His museology  was  particularly  acclaimed.  Besides  the  famous  National
Museum of Anthropology (1964), he designed many others, such as, the  Museum
of History Caracol  (1960), the Museum of Modern Art in Mexico City  (1964),
and the Olympic Museum in Lausanne Switzerland. Rmirez Vzquez saw  in  the
design of museums a didactic, aesthetic and  social  task  that  would  link
content and space into a single experience.

His work is as extensive as  it  is  diverse,  and  Rmirez  Vzquezs  most
representative architectural contribution could  be  experienced  in  spaces
for public gathering and educational buildings.  Towards  the  beginning  of
his career, he developed a prefabricated modular design  for  rural  schools
(1958). With such a design, more than 30  thousand  schools  were  built  in
just six years across Mexico. He also  designed  around  15  public  markets
among which are Mercado de la Lagunilla and Coyoacn in  collaboration  with
Flix Candela and Rafael Mijares (1956).  His  work  represented  Mexico  in
several World Fairs  including  Brussels  in  1958,  Seattle  in  1962,  and
Seville in 1992. His trajectory was honoured with a number of  prizes,  such
as the Fine Arts Medal from the National Institute of Fine Arts (1973),  and
the Cemex Life Award in 2003, among many others.


Selected Works
1952.            School of Medicine of the  National  Autonomous  University
of Mexico (In collaboration with  Roberto  lvarez  Espinosa,  Ramn  Torres
Martnez and Hctor Velzquez), Mexico City.
1964.            National Museum  of  Anthropology  (In  collaboration  with
Rafael Mijares and Jorge Campuzano), Mexico City.
1966.            Aztec Stadium (In collaboration  with  Rafael  Mijares  and
Luis Martnez del Campo), Mexico City.
1968.            Graphic Design for the Olympic Games, Mexico 1968.
1975.            New Basilica of Our Lady  of  Guadalupe  (In  collaboration
with Jos Luis Benlluire, Alejandro Schoenhofer, Gabriel Chvez de  la  Mora
and Javier Garca Lascurin), Mexico City.
1980.            Chamber of  Deputies  San  Lazaro  Legislative  Palace  (In
collaboration with David  Muoz,  Jorge  Campuzano  and  Pedro  Beguerisse),
Mexico City.
1982.            Tijuana  Cultural  Center  (In  collaboration  with  Manuel
Rosen), Tijuana, Mexico.
1984.            Torre Mexicana, Mexico City.


References and further reading:
Lazo Margain  Alejandro,  Rmirez  Vzquez,  Pedro  eds.  (1980)  Industrial
design and human development, Mexico City:  Excerpta  Medica,  International
Congress Series 510.
Rmirez Vzquez, Pedro. (1968) El  Museo  Nacional  de  Antropologa.  Arte,
Arquitectura, Arqueologa, Etnografa. Barcelona: Lausana.
Rmirez  Vzquez,  Pedro.  (1988)  Pedro  Ramirez  Vazquez:  Imagen  y  Obra
Escogida. Mexico City: UNAM. Coleccin Mxico 93.



Visual material:
[pic]
School of Medicine of  the  National  Autonomous  University  of  Mexico  in
Mexico City.
1952
http://www.arquine.com/blog/la-obra-de-ramirez-vazquez/

[pic]

National Museum of Anthropology in Mexico City.
1964
[pic]
Graphic Design for the Olympic Games
1968
http://www.arquine.com/blog/la-obra-de-ramirez-vazquez/

[pic]
New Basilica of Our Lady of Guadalupe in Mexico City.
1975
http://www.archdaily.mx/215396/clasicos-de-arquitectura-basilica-de-santa-
maria-de-guadalupe-pedro-ramirez-vazquez/

[pic]
Tijuana Cultural Center in Tijuana, Mexico.
1982
http://www.arquine.com/blog/la-obra-de-ramirez-vazquez/

[pic]
Torre Mexicana in Mexico City.
1984
http://www.arquine.com/blog/la-obra-de-ramirez-vazquez/


-----------------------
[1]     Lazo  Margain  Alejandro,  Rmirez  Vzquez,   Pedro   eds.   (1980)
Industrial design and  human  development,  Mexico  City:  Excerpta  Medica,
International Congress Series 510. Page 36.

