
Rayism
[pic]
http://www.imj.org.il/imagine/collections/item.asp?itemNum=19284
Natalia Goncharova: Rayist Fountain, 1914, Oil on canvas, 140.6x87.3cm. Sam
and Ayala Zacks Collection, The Israel Museum, Jerusalem.
Image and reproduction rights need to be sought from the The Israel Museum,
Jerusalem.
Copyright needs to be sought from ADAGP in Paris, or DACS (representing
ADAGP in the UK) or ARS (representing ADAGP in the USA).


An abstract and non-objective style of painting, Rayism (Luchizm) was
pioneered by the Russian artist MIKHAIL LARIONOV in early 1912. The style
represented the first theoretically coherent and practically consistent
response on the part of the Russian avant-garde to the challenges of French
Cubism and Italian Futurism. In divorcing art from figuration and in its
emphasis on  the purely formal qualities of painting, Rayism prepared the
way for the development of both SUPREMATISM and CONSTRUCTIVISM. Larionovs
innovative style was practised chiefly by those artists in his immediate
orbit: painters such as Natalia GONCHAROVA, Alexander Shevchenko and
Mikhail Le-Dantiyu, who belonged to the Donkeys Tail and Target group.
Whilst Rayism had a limited life-span in Russia, being overtaken by
Suprematism in 1915, Larionov and Goncharova continued to practice the
style throughout their careers, executing Rayist paintings right up to the
1950s.

In its earliest phase, known as Realistic Rayism (Realistichesky
luchizm), the style proceeded from Larionovs interest in optics and
Impressionist colour theory and specifically from the idea that the colour,
contour and form of our world is defined by rays of light reflected from
all material objects. According to Larionovs booklet Rayism (Luchizm) of
1912, his initial aim was to explore the nature of visual perception as it
exists before the brain converts what we see into a comprehensible form.
This theory, however, was never methodically articulated at the level of
practice. In Larionovs Glass: Rayist Method of 1912 (New York: Guggenheim)
the artist fragments the picture space of the painting by lines and
chevrons of paint which represent the light rays reflected from the objects
in the picture, but not in any precise or scientific manner. The process of
abstraction is taken a stage further in Rayist Cockerel of 1912 (St.
Petersburg: Russian Museum) in which both the cockerel and its surrounding
picture space explode with lines of prismatic colour. Comparative works by
Goncharova include Cats: Rayist Perception in Rose, Black and Yellow (New
York: Guggenheim) and Green and Yellow Forest (Stuttgart: Staatsgalerie)
both from 1912.

During 1913 Larionovs theory and practice evolved very rapidly, leading to
a highly innovative form of abstract creation called Pnemuo-Rayism
(Pnevmo-Luchizm). At the level of practice Larionov now abolished the last
remanants of figuration so that paintings such as Rayism: Domination of Red
(New York: MOMA) and Red and Blue Rayism (Ufa: Bashkir State Art Museum),
both of 1913, took the form of dynamic intersections of coloured lines and
chevrons of paint creating a complex and shifting optical space. In some
works, such as Rayism: Sunny Day (Paris: MNAM) of 1914 he began to employ
mixed media, building the work out into real space with papier-mach. In
theoretical terms Larionov explored a more metaphysical view of Rayism,
equating the non-objective picture space of his paintings with the fourth
dimension of space, an idea common in contemporary mysticism and popular
philosophy. GONCHAROVA also made a substantial contribution to this later
phase of Rayism. Most notable are her series of Rayist Perceptions (New
York, MOMA), and the visually stunning Rayist Fountain (Jerusalem: Israel
Museum).

Whilst Rayism received much critical attention, both positive and negative,
in the contemporary Russian art press, it received its greatest accolade
from the poet and cubist critic Guillaume APOLLINAIRE, who praised the
style as a genuine aesthetic discovery (Nathalie de Gontcharowa et Michel
Larionow, exhibition catalogue Galerie Paul Guillaume, Paris, 1914).
Subsequently, Rayism fell into critical obscurity until 1936 when Alfred
Barr finally established its artistic and historical significance in his
famousCubism and Abstract Art exhibition at the Museum of Modern Art in
New York.

Reading

Larionov, M. (1912), Luchizm, Moscow: Ts. Miunster

Larionov, M.; Goncharova, N. et al. (1913), Luchisty i budushchniki:
Manifest, in Oslinyi khvost i Mishen, Moscow: Ts. Miunster, pp. 9-48

Larionov, M.; Goncharova, N. et al. (1913), Luchistskaia zhivopis, in
Oslinyi khvost i Mishen, Moscow: Ts. Miunster, pp. 83-124

Larionov, M. (1914), Le rayonnisme picturale, in Montjoie!,
April/May/June 1914, Nos. 4/5/6, p. 15

Parton, Anthony (1993), Mikhail Larionov and the Russian Avant-Garde,
Princeton / London: Princeton University Press  / Thames & Hudson (see
Chapters 2, 7 & 8).

Parton, Anthony (2010), Goncharova: The Art and Design of Natalia
Goncharova, Woodbridge, UK: Antique Collectors Club (see Chapters 2 & 5)

Warren, Sarah (2013): Mikhail Larionov and the Cultural Politics of Late
Imperial Russia, Farnham (UK): Ashgate


Electronic Sources
Compton, S. (1978), Italian Futurism and Russia, in Art Journal, Vol. 41,
No. 4, pp. 343-348. Available at JStore (pay site):
http://www.jstor.org/stable/776444

Dabrowski, M. (1975), The Formation and Development of Rayism, in Art
Journal, Vol. 34, No. 3, Spring 1975, pp. 200-207. Available at JStor (pay
site): http://www.jstor.org/stable/775991


Parton, A. (1983), Russian 'Rayism', the Work and Theory of Mikhail
Larionov and Natalya Goncharova 1912-1914: Ouspensky's Four-Dimensional
Super Race?, in Leonardo
Vol. 16, No. 4, Autumn, 1983, pp. 298-305. Available at JStor (pay site):
http://www.jstor.org/stable/1574956


