Taylor & Francis – Encyclopedia of Modernism



About you

[Salutation]

Hazel

[Middle name]

Donkin



[Enter your biography]



Durham University



Your article

Man Ray (1890-1976)

[Enter any variant forms of your headword – OPTIONAL]

Born Emmanuel Radnitzky, Man Ray was one of the key innovators in modernist photography, film, and object making. He began his artistic career as a painter, and while his interest in the medium endured, it was photography that brought him financial and critical success. In New York, Man Ray was introduced to the avant-garde while visiting Alfred Stieglitz’s 291 gallery and the Armory Show (1913). He met Marcel Duchamp in 1915 and, along with Picabia, the three men founded New York dada. In 1921 Man Ray moved to Paris where he continued to produce experimental and provocative works, and was associated with the Paris dada group. Man Ray developed a lucrative portrait and fashion photography business, photographing cultural giants such as James Joyce and Pablo Picasso, earning him commissions from magazines such as Vogue.  From 1924 photographic images became central in Surrealist publications, and Man Ray’s intensely innovative approach was highly regarded by the founder of the group, André Breton.  Man Ray developed a poetic that demonstrated the union of reality and imagination; he used found images, documentary images, film stills, and straight and experimental photography, including solarisation (a process he developed with Lee Miller). World War II forced him to leave Paris for the United States, but he returned in 1951, where he resided until his death.

Born Emmanuel Radnitzky, Man Ray was one of the key innovators in modernist photography, film, and object making. He began his artistic career as a painter, and while his interest in the medium endured, it was photography that brought him financial and critical success. In New York, Man Ray was introduced to the avant-garde while visiting Alfred Stieglitz’s 291 gallery and the Armory Show (1913). He met Marcel Duchamp in 1915 and, along with Picabia, the three men founded New York dada. In 1921 Man Ray moved to Paris where he continued to produce experimental and provocative works, and was associated with the Paris dada group. Man Ray developed a lucrative portrait and fashion photography business, photographing cultural giants such as James Joyce and Pablo Picasso, earning him commissions from magazines such as Vogue.  From 1924 photographic images became central in Surrealist publications, and Man Ray’s intensely innovative approach was highly regarded by the founder of the group, André Breton.  Man Ray developed a poetic that demonstrated the union of reality and imagination; he used found images, documentary images, film stills, and straight and experimental photography, including solarisation (a process he developed with Lee Miller). World War II forced him to leave Paris for the United States, but he returned in 1951, where he resided until his death.



Man Ray’s parents were Russian-Jewish immigrants who moved to New York in 1897. Man Ray spent his youth in New York and, following high school, he attended art evening classes sporadically, and worked as a commercial artist (as a technical illustrator) for several Manhattan companies. He began to use the name Man Ray around 1911, partly due to anti-semitism prevalent at the time. He studied drawing under Robert Henri at the ‘anarchist’ Ferrer School in 1912, and began a period of rapid artistic development. In 1913 he moved to ‘Grantwood,’ an artists’ colony in Ridgefield, New Jersey with Samuel Halpert, another student of Henri. There he produced Cubist inspired paintings, wrote and published poetry, and drew political cartoons for Emma Goldman’s ‘Mother Earth News.’ In 1913 together with Alfred Kreymborg at Grantwood he founded the ‘Others’ art group; participants included William Carlos Williams, Mina Loy, and Marianne Moore. The group came into contact with émigré artists who had fled the war in Europe, and in 1915 Man Ray met Marcel Duchamp after joining the colony. The two men became life-long collaborators. In 1916, along with Duchamp and Katherine Drier, Man Ray founded the avant-garde exhibiting society the ‘Societé Anonyme,’ where he made objects, collages, assemblages, and began experimenting with photography.   



[portrait.jpg]



Figure 1 Man Ray Solarised portrait of Lee Miller (c. 1929) 

© Man Ray Trust/ADAGP, Paris and DACS, London 2012,  

Courtesy The Penrose Collection and the Lee Miller Archives (http://www.leemiller.co.uk/ )

In 1921 Man Ray moved to Paris where he became part of the Paris Dada group. In December 1921 he had a solo show at Librairie Six, a bookstore owned by Philippe and Mick Soupault. Man Ray recounts the story in his autobiography of how, on the afternoon of the exhibition opening, he bought a flat iron and some nails from a hardware shop while out for a stroll with Eric Satie. He glued the nails to the work surface of the iron to create the object Gift, placing it in the show on his return to Librairie Six. Man Ray opened a photography studio and experimented with photographic techniques including photograms (cameraless pictures) which he called ‘Rayographs’ and, in 1922, he published Champs Délicieux, a photographic album of 12 rayographs with a preface by Tristan Tzara. Commissions for portrait and fashion photographs provided Man Ray with a steady income, making him wealthy as he progressed through his artistic career. 



[Image: gift.jpg]

Figure 2 Gift (1958 reproduction of 1921 original) http://www.moma.org/collection/object.php?object_id=81212 

Credit Line: James Thrall Soby Fund; MoMA Number: 249.1966; Copyright: © 2014 Man Ray Trust / Artists Rights Society (ARS), New York / ADAGP, Paris



When André Breton launched Surrealism in 1924, Man Ray began a long-term association with the movement. He produced photographs, original and found, for surrealist journals such as La Révolution Surréaliste (1924-29) and Le Surréalisme au Service de la Révolution (1930-33) as well as objects, paintings and films. Man Ray suggested that Eugène Atget’s photographs of Paris should be published in La Révolution Surréaliste in 1926, recognising them as images not just of the city, but of the city as a site of the marvellous. He took on assistants who would become key avant-garde photographers in their own right; Berenice Abbott (1923-26), Jacques André Boiffard (1926-29) and Lee Miller (1929-32). With Miller he experimented with the technique of solarisation — a technique where the image is part positive and part negative. Man Ray’s notable films include Le Retour à la Raison (1923), Emak-Bakia (1926), L’Étoile de Mer (1928-29), Les Mystères du Château de Dé (1929) and, with Duchamp, Anémic Cinéma (1926). In 1929 Man Ray’s experimental photography was exhibited in the seminal Film und Foto show in Stuttgart. The modified photograph Le Violon d’Ingres (1924) is typical of his oeuvre; a sexually charged piece that aesthetically transforms the classical nude portrait. At once humorous, celebratory and disturbing, Le Violon d’Ingres’ title is a play on words, suggesting that the woman is a mere ‘hobby’ while also alluding to rape (viol is French for rape). Upon his return to the United States in 1940, Man Ray quickly became a successful painter and photographer in Hollywood. He returned to Paris in 1951 where he continued to work until he died in his studio at the age of 86. 



[Image: viol.jpg]

Figure 3 Man Ray, Le Violin d’Ingres (1924) http://www.getty.edu/art/gettyguide/artObjectDetails?artobj=61240

Copyright © Man Ray Trust ARS-ADAGP

Further reading:

(Baldwin)



(Bate)



(Duchamp/Man Ray/Picabia)



(Man Ray Trust)



(Man Ray (1945-1998))



(Man Ray Portraits)



(Ray)