
STRAUB, Jean-Marie (January 8, 1933)
HUILLET, Danile (May 1, 1936-October 9, 2006)

Jean-Marie Straub and Danile Huillet were a filmmaking couple working from
the early 1960s to the latters death in 2006, after which point Straub has
continued to make films alone. Although they were initially associated with
the New German Cinema movement of the 1960s and 1970s, the majority of
their work has been filmed in either Italy or France, and both individuals
are French by birth.

IMAGE NOT RECONCILED

      Straub/Huillets early work consisted of a pair of adaptations of
Heinrich Bll stories (Machorka-Muff in 1962 and Nicht Vershnt [Not
Reconciled] in 1965), their feature debut Chronik der Anna Magdalena Bach
(Chronicle of Anna Magdalena Bach, 1968) and the short film Der Brutigam,
die Comdiantin und der Zuhlter (The Bridegroom, the Comedian and the
Pimp, 1969). All were shot in Germany, using black and white film stock,
with a tendency towards baroque camera angles, intricate narrative
structures and an intransigent use of direct sound (an unconventional
practice at the time). From this point, however, their work undertook a
more radical turn: their adaptation of Corneilles neglected play Othon 
filmed in French on Romes Palatine hill in 1969  initiated a heated
critical debate between the journals Cahiers du cinma and Positif, and
since this time Straub/Huillet have been seen as paragons, alongside
Godard, Oshima and Pasolini, of political modernism in the cinema, a
viewpoint which has been bolstered by the stridently militant tone of many
of the interviews given by Straub.

IMAGE OTHON

      While the highpoint of their popularity was undoubtedly in the 1970s,
with the release of Geschichtsunterricht (History Lessons, 1972) and Moses
und Aaron (Moses and Aaron, 1974), some of Straub/Huillets most
fascinating work has come in more recent decades. In 1984 they directed a
visually striking adaptation of Kafkas novel Amerika (Klassenverhltnisse
[Class Relations]), while the late 1980s saw a series of films based on the
work of the German writer Friedrich Hlderlin, which was followed by a
number of adaptations of the Italian Marxist authors Cesare Pavese and Elio
Vittorini, including Sicilia! (1998) and Operai, contadini (Workers,
Peasants, 2000). Indeed, Jacques Rancire (in Lafosse, 2007) has located
1979s Dalla nube alla resistenza (From the Clouds to the Resistance, based
on a pair of Pavese texts) as the major turning point in the duos uvre:
for the French philosopher, this film marked a shift from a dialectical to
a lyrical outlook in Straub/Huillets work, and from an orthodox Marxist
conception of communism to a peasant-based, ecological communist ideal.
      Straub/Huillet have always been divisive figures: few of their films
have found broad appeal with audiences, and some critics have castigated
their work as tedious, or even artistically fraudulent. Even their
advocates frequently have recourse to adjectives such as austere and
rigorous. Indeed, extended long-takes with a minimum of narrative action
preponderate in their work, the source texts for almost all their films are
drawn from the Western literary/artistic canon, and the systems they have
devised for articulating shots depart markedly from the norms of mainstream
cinema. Moreover, perhaps the greatest degree of critical  opprobrium is
provoked by their unique approach to filmed speech: invariably, the non-
professional actors in Straub/Huillets films reject the conventions of
naturalistic speech and adopt a diction more closely adhering to the
rhythmic qualities of Sprechgesang.

IMAGE ANTIGONE

      In defence of their films, meanwhile, a minority of critics has
emphasised the sensuous nature of Straub/Huillets work, the rare access
they give the viewer to the visceral sights and sounds of the environment
surrounding the shoot: the droning of insects, the gushing of a nearby
stream, or leaves rustling in the wind. It is this deeply materialist
quality to their cinema which, in recent years, has had a significant
influence on a generation of younger filmmakers, including the Portuguese
director Pedro Costa, whose documentary O gt votre sourire enfoui? (Where
Does Your Hidden Smile Lie?, 1996) constitutes an informative insight into
the working methods of the couple.


CLIP HIDDEN SMILE

Further Reading:

Bser, U. (2004) The Art of Seeing, the Art of Listening: Visual
Representation in the Films of Jean-Marie Straub and Danile Huillet.
Frankfurt: Europaischer Verlag.
Bsers discussion of Straub/Huillets visual pedagogy can be dry at times,
but offers valuable insight into some of their more neglected work.

Byg, B. (1995) Landscapes of Resistance: The German Films of Danile
Huillet and Jean-Marie Straub. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Still the best English-language resource on the filmmakers work, but Byg
limits his scope is limited to Straub/Huillets German-language films.

Lafosse, P. (2007) Ltrange cas de Madame Huillet et Monsieur Straub.
Paris: Ombres.
A transcription of conversations with and about Straub/Huillet, including a
decisive intervention by Jacques Rancire.

Ofner, A. (ed., 2004) Die Frchte des Zorns und der Zrtlichkeit: Werkschau
Danile Huillet/Jean-Marie Straub. Vienna: Viennale.
This catalogue for the 2004 Viennale retrospective of their work contains a
peerless selection of short texts on Straub/Huillet, in English and German.

Roud, R. (1971) Straub. London: Martin Secker & Warburg.
The first monograph on Straub/Huillets work by one of the most prominent
advocates of their work, Rouds book is still a useful reference point for
their early films (up to Othon).

List of Works:

Machorka-Muff (West Germany, 1962).

Nicht Vershnt, oder Es hilft nur die Gewalt, wo die Gewalt herrscht (Not
Reconciled, West Germany, 1965).

Chronik der Anna Magdalena Bach (Chronicle of Anna Magdalena Bach, West
Germany, 1968).

Der Brutigam, die Comdiantin und der Zuhlter (The Bridegroom, the
Comedian and the Pimp, West Germany, 1969).

Les Yeux ne veulent pas en tout temps se fermer, ou Peut-tre qu'un jour
Rome se permettra de choisir  son tour (Othon, France/Italy, 1970).

Geschichtsunterricht (History Lessons, West Germany/Italy, 1972).

Moses und Aron (Moses and Aaron, West Germany/Italy, 1974).

Dalla nube alla resistenza (From the Clouds to the Resistance, 1979

Klassenverhltnisse (Class Relations, West Germany, 1984).

Der Tod des Empedokles (The Death of Empedocles, West Germany/Italy, 1987)

Antigone (Germany/Italy, 1991).

Sicilia! (Italy, 1998)

Operai, contadini (Workers, Peasants, Italy, 2000).

Quei loro incontri (Italy, 2006)

Daniel Fairfax
Yale University
