
Altenberg, Peter (Richard Englnder, 1859-1919)


Born in Vienna on March 9, 1859, the Jewish-Austrian poet Peter Altenberg
(birth name: Richard Englnder) became a literary sensation with his
characteristically telegraphic writing style. The purpose of this narrative
form, he explained, was to capture the smallness (Kleinigkeit) of modern
lifefleeting, ordinary, and unembellished. His so-called prose poems went
on to garner the admiration of contemporary artists, architects, and
writers who belonged to the Young Vienna. They included, among others,
Hermann Bahr, Gustav Klimt, Hugo von Hofmannsthal, Karl Kraus, and Arthur
Schnitzler. Suffering from pneumonia, Altenberg died in Vienna on January
8, 1919.

Opposed to the assignment and expectation of specific social roles in a
conservative Austro-Hungarian Empire, Altenberg took on a nom de plume to
redefine his cultural identity in the image of the oppressed, including
children, women, and non-Europeans. This act of political resistance in
writing became a lifelong commitment to exposing the divided and
hypocritical world around him, although some of his works portrayed those
in suffering with a certain degree of eroticization and prejudice. By
focusing on moments of ambiguity, contradiction, monotony, and triviality
in social interaction, he exposed the clash of cultures between old
provincialism and new cosmopolitanism in contemporary Vienna while pushing
new limits of mimetic representation.

Altenberg is considered a paradoxical figure in fin-de-sicle Austria, a
writer whose self-proclaimed attempt to be a man without concession (Mann
ohne Concession) manifests itself in a double bind of moral idealism and
social pathology. Gustav Jagerspachers portrait of the middle-aged poet in
front of an advertisement for the Apollo Variety Theater offers a glimpse
of this acute tension between conformism and self-determination. [Image 1]
Nervously walking down the street at night and with long, skeletal fingers
holding onto his hat, Altenberg shows signs not only of a Baudelairean
flneur who absorbs every detail of his vibrant community, but also of a
profound uncertainty that borders on physical illness and melancholy.
Marked by such hypersensitivities to the world, Altenbergs writings amount
to works written by an anti-modern modernist, a misogynist feminist, an
anti-Semitic Jew, and a drug-addicted health fanatic. And yet, it is
the difficulty of describing Altenberg in one way or another that
illustrates his artistic genius in Austrian cultural history.

Key Works:
1896  Wie ich es sehe
1897  Ashantee, first translated into English in 2007
1900  Was der Tag mir zutrgt
1925  Der Nachlass, an autobiography published posthumously

Music inspired by the author:
Berg, Alban (1912) Altenberg-Lieder: Fnf Orchesterlieder nach
Ansichtskarten Texten von Peter Altenberg.

References and further reading:
Barker, Andrew (1996) Telegrams from the Soul: Peter Altenberg and the
Culture of Fin-de-sicle Vienna, Columbia: Camden House.
Nehring, Wolfgang (2007) Peter Altenberg and His Time, Ashantee,
Riverside: Ariadne Press.

[Note to Cambridge editor: For source of Image 1 and possible copyright
information, see http://www.wellcomecollection.org/full-
image.aspx?page=493&image=gustav-jagerspacher-portrait]
