
Der Nister, penname of Pinhas Kahanovitch (1884-1950)

      Der Nister (The Hidden One) was born in Berdychiv, Ukraine; he died
in a Soviet military hospital under Stalin.  Little else is known about the
details of his biography, but Der Nister witnessedand, in some measure,
participated inthe great upheavals of the early twentieth century in
Eastern Europe.  His early writings have a mystical bent; later works
engage, obliquely, with social issues.
      Der Nisters best-known work is an unfinished novel, Di Mishpokhe
Mashber (The Family Mashber) (1939).  This account of the lives of three
brothers in nineteenth-century Ukraine also offers the portrait of an
agethe conflicts and threats facing Jewish civilization from within and
without.  At first blush, the lengthy narrative (which was conceived as
part of a longer work) seems to abide by the rules of socialist realism,
the literary form officially endorsed by the Soviet state.  Attention to
the novels style, however, reveals that the events depicted are just as
opaque and riddling as anything from the pen of more famous high
modernists.  The Family Mashber portrays its subjects with sympathy, yet it
also depicts their misadventures in an ironic light.  The result is a
chronicle that is, at once, personal and detached, warmhearted and
skepticala perspective that bows neither to the pieties of tradition nor
to the secular dogmas of Marxist-Leninism.
      During the Second World War, Der Nister wrote a remarkable series of
medium-length narratives devoted to Jewish responses to the Nazi invasion
of Eastern Europe and program of extermination.  These tales, which were
not published in the Soviet Union for over two decades (finally, they
appeared under the title Regrowth), place contemporary disaster in the
context of events in the late-nineteenth and early-twentieth centuries, and
offer complex portraits of a people facing events that defy understanding.
Accordingly, characters reactionsand, in many cases, inactiondiffer
greatly.  Members of the Jewish Councilsdecision-making bodies that
suffered much ill fame for cooperating with the Nazisare shown in a
favorable light, quiet scholars become bent on revenge, pious daughters
join the ranks of the partisans, and the underground milieu is shown to
harbor double agents.  Here as elsewhere, Der Nister is intent on
confounding easy interpretations and summary moral judgments.  Cannily, the
author reintroduces characters and figures from earlier tales, creating a
complex web of correspondences between present and past events.  As always,
biblical and religious references color the picture, as well.
      Der Nisters oeuvre represents a sustained engagement with the
question of what it means to be Jewish in a time of upheaval and change,
when things could easily turn from better to worseor from worse to
outright catastrophe. Der Nisters exploration of estrangement from
tradition, the often-illusory promises of progress, and the fate of
outsiders (whether individuals or collectives) lend his writings a
universal scope.  Unfortunately, most of his works have not been reprinted
since their initial publication and still await translation.

Key Works

Di Mishpokhe Mashber (1939, The Family Mashber 1987)
Vidervuks (1969, Regrowth 2010)

References and further reading

Bechtel, Delphine (1991), Der Nisters Work, 1907-1929, Bern: Peter Lang.
Caplan, Marc (2008), The Hermit at the Circus: Der Nister, Yiddish
Literature, and the Weimar Period, Studia Rosenthaliana, 41.
