
Witold Gombrowicz (1904-1969)

Timeline of Life

1904 Born in Maoszyce, in Congress Poland, Russian Empire (today, Poland)
1933 Literary debut with Pamitnik z okresu dojrzewania (Memoirs from the
Time of Immaturity)
1939 Exiled in Argentina when Germany invades his native Poland
1963 Returns to Europe, retires at Vence
1969 Dies

Selective Timeline of Works Published

1933 Pamitnik z okresu dojrzewania (Memoirs from the Time of Immaturity)
1935 Iwona, ksiniczka Burgunda (Ivona, Princess of Burgundia)
1937 Ferdydurke
1953 Trans-Atlantyk
1953 lub [first published in Spanish translation 1948]
1960 Pornographia
1965 Cosmos

      Born into a wealthy landed family, Gombrowicz debuted in the avant-
garde milieu of interwar Warsaw.  In 1939, when the Germans invaded Poland,
he was on a journalistic assignment in Argentina, where he spent most of
his adult life.  Most of Gombrowiczs works were first printed by the
Polish expatriate press in Paris. In 1963, he returned to Europe.  Retiring
to Vence, in the south of France, he never saw his native land again.
      Ferdydurke (1937), Gombrowiczs major work, appeared after a
collection of short stories, Pamitnik z okresu dojrzewania (Memoirs from
the Time of Immaturity (1933, subsequently published, with additions, as
Bakakaj [1957]).  Ferdydurke tells the tale of a man who, unable to grow up
and assume the responsibilities of adulthood, finds himself transported
back to schoolan ungainly adult among ungainly boysby the magic of a
diabolical pedant.  Besides a series of awkward encounters, in which the
heros displaced existence provokes mounting anarchy in the lives of those
he meets, Ferdydurke contains chapters that take up the subject matter in
other waysfor example, the narrative of a duel between rival academics
that devolves from the sphere of learning to physical altercations, and
manifesto-like passages celebrating the eloquence of the inarticulate.
Throughout his omnidirectional satire, Gombrowicz deflates the pretensions
of others by offering himself as an object of ridicule.
      Trans-Atlantyk (1953), which the author wrote while working at a bank
in Argentina, describes further picaresque adventures, including forays
into the criminal and homosexual underworlds of his adoptive country.
Written in the mannered style of seventeenth-century mock epic, the novel
takes on the salon culture of South American letters (especially the
court around Jorge Luis Borges), the doomed nationalism of exiles longing
to restore the glory of Poland from abroad, and the cabals and petty
intrigues of bureaucratic functionaries.  Like Ferdydurke, Trans-Atlantyk
is a semi-autobiographical account of false martyrdom, a willfully
hypocritical tale of remaining true to ideals that, because they reject the
promise of perfection, can only ever count as wrong.
      In his Diarieswhich he wrote for publication beginning in
1953Gombrowicz addressed a wide range of philosophical and literary
topics, advocating that the exiled Polish intelligentsia stop trying to
follow English and French models and instead embrace inferiority.  While
the scathing and polemical tone of much in the Diaries violated the decorum
of learned discourse, Gombrowicz showed himself to be conversant in the
philosophy and intellectual debates of the day (e.g., existentialism and
structuralism), and his critiques of academic pieties are full of nuance
and subtlety.  Often playing the part of the devils advocate, Gombrowicz
offered ingenious defenses of institutions in which he did not believe
(Catholicism, among other things).  The Diaries also contain instructive
commentary on the authors own works.  If his calls met with
incomprehension and hostilityhis works were forbidden in Poland until
1956, only to be banned again two years laterGombrowicz nevertheless made
a name for himself in Polish letters by putting his principles into action.

      Gombrowiczs plays treat the concerns of his novels and critical
writings in a different medium.  Ivona, Princess of Burgundia (1935) is the
story of a prince who realizes that marriage to an unappealing girl
represents the ultimate act of sovereignty.  To assert his autonomy, he
takes a bride who is a blank slate but for a vaguely irritating quality no
one can account for.  The mere presence of Ivona provokes unease until,
finally, the royal house verges on collapse; only when the courtiers
conspire to murder her is balance restored.  Written in a fantastical style
reminiscent of both seventeenth-century drama (e.g., Calderns Life is a
Dream) and twentieth-century absurdism (for example, the works of Samuel
Beckett), The Marriage (1953), likewise centers on a symbolic act in which
the welfare of a community hangs in precarious balance.  Returning from
war, the hero seeks to redeem his family and fiance from the hardship and
disgrace into which they have fallen.  The means to this end is a ceremony
requiring cooperation by people who escape his control; therefore, order
emerges only to collapse again.
      Gombrowiczs last two novels, Pornographia (1960) and Cosmos (1965),
are cooler in tone and display a more malevolent tone (in the sense of
Edgar Allan Poe or Charles Baudelaire).  In Pornographia, Gombrowicz tells
the story of an alter egoalso named Witoldwho, in the company of
another blas Warsaw intellectual, makes an excursion to the Polish
countryside during wartime.  Enchanted by a boy and a girl who seem made
for each other yet refuse to have an erotic relationship, the elder pair
conspires for them to be united in the assassination of a military officer
who has lost his nerve and therefore represents a weak point in the war
effort.  Cosmos likewise presents a tale of obsession culminating in death
(this time, the suicide of the husband of a young woman who intrigues the
narrator).  Creatively perverse until the last, Gombrowicz married Rita
Labrosse the year before he died.
      The various strands of Gombrowiczs oeuvre are united by an abiding
interest in the immature, the youthful, and the marginalespecially as it
conflicts with the rigid demands of family, education, religion, and social
hierarchy.  Life in its raw state, which has not yet reached a condition of
completion and fullness, provides both the theme and the substance of
Gombrowiczs narratives and dramas, where the order that prevails between
characters is ultimately undone when one (or more) of them fails to play
along with the conventions others follow.  Although such an understanding
of the literary craft is not unique to Gombrowiczmodernism, according to
Peter Gay, follows the lure of heresythe authors fondness for slapstick
and the grotesque set him apart from contemporaries who explore the same
themes in a more earnest manner.

Key Works

Ferdydurke (1937, English translation 2000)
Trans-Atlantyk (1953, English translation 1995)
Pornographia     (1960, English translation 2010)
Cosmos (1965, English translation 2011)

Further Reading

Giroud, Vincent (2007), The World of Witold Gombrowicz 1904-1969, New
Haven: Yale University Press
Ziarek, Ewa Ponowska, ed. (1998) Gombrowiczs Grimaces: Modernism, Gender,
Nationality, Albany: State University of New York Press

