
Douglas Brent McBride
Cornell University
Routledge Encyclopedia of Modernism

Die Aktion was a review of radical politics and culture published by Franz
Pfemfert (1879-1954) in Berlin from 1911 to 1932. During the period of its
greatest influence before World War I, Die Aktion offered a home to the
Expressionist movement and had a weekly circulation of 7000.The journal
functioned as a locus of pacifist opposition during the war but lost its
earlier status when Pfemfert renounced Expressionism and turned Die Aktion
into a vehicle of anarchist socialism in the twenties.

Early issues of Die Aktion [image 1] announced A Magazine for Liberal
Politics and Culture and promised to be an organ of honest radicalism.
The format of two columns across sixteen tabloid-sized sheets of newsprint
mimicked the layout of a daily paper. Overnight the journal established
itself as the rival of Der Sturm as a forum for the coalition of young
artists and poets that became Expressionism. As Pfemferts unwavering
commitment to revolutionary politics drew writers from the less-politicized
Sturm, Die Aktion assumed a unique role introducing new poetry in German.
The apocalyptic imagery of the poem End of the World by Jakob von Hoddis
and the radical literary criticism exemplified by Ludwig Rubiners
manifesto The Poet Intervenes in Politics typify this chapter in the
journals life.

When Pfemfert enlisted Rubiner in April 1914 to write an apology for
politicized art, Painters Build Barricades, and began running graphic art
on the cover, the timing proved fortuitous. The onset in August of European
war forced him to forego the political commentary that had only recently
led to his prosecution for inciting rebellion and a court decision
requiring that Die Aktion be submitted to censors before going to press.
This constraint encouraged Pfemfert to continue giving space to
Expressionist art, such as the drawing Battlefield by Ludwig Meidner
[image 2], and forced him to develop covert strategies for expressing
opposition. The most creative of these was the rubric I Cut out the
Times, which reproduced war boosterism with no commentary other than an
introduction that identified the source and expressed ironic ridicule. The
most characteristic feature of the war-time period was Poetry from the
Battlefield, which presented anti-heroic verse by troops that contrasted
with the hurrah poetry in the popular press.

When a naval mutiny led to a socialist revolution and the end of the war in
November 1918, it became known that Pfemfert had organized a clandestine
group called the Antinational Socialist Party and secretly printed a banned
tract by Rosa Luxemburg during her imprisonment. After attempting to
promote proletarian literature in the immediate postwar period, Pfemfert
renounced all interest in poetry and turned Die Aktion into a vehicle for
anarchist socialism at odds with Moscow and the German communist party.
When Hitler took power in 1933 Pfemfert emigrated to Paris and then Mexico
City, where he died in 1941.

References and further reading:
Raabe, P. (1974) The Era of German Expressionism, London: Calder & Boyars.
Rietzschel, T. (1986) Die Aktion 1911-1918: Eine Auswahl, Berlin and
Weimar: Aufbau.
