
Der Sturm

Der Sturm (storm) was the fulcrum of the international avant-garde in
Berlin from 1910 to 1932. Herwarth Walden (born Georg Levin, 1878-1941)
founded the journal, Der Sturm, in 1910. His first wife, the poet Else
Lasker-Schler, likely suggested both his nom-de-guerre and the newspapers
title. Walden, a pianist who had studied with Conrad Ansorge, a former
prodigy of Franz Liszt, had ambitions that exceeded the concert hall.
Suggesting both the multiplicity of arts that Der Sturm would embrace, and
the intention to reach a wide audience, the pianist-impresario-editor,
Walden, traveled with the poet-playwright-artist, Lasker-Schler, and the
painter-printmaker-dramatist, Oskar Kokoschka, across Germany to distribute
the first edition to the people. The group and their paper met with
incomprehension, however, so they returned to cultivate a more select
audience in the metropolis.

Initially, Der Sturm showcased literary talent, predominantly Berlin
writers (e.g., Lasker-Schler, Alfred Dblin, Peter Hille, Paul Scheerbart)
and contributors recommended by Karl Kraus, editor of the renowned Viennese
journal, Die Fackel, and Der Sturms initial benefactor. Through Kraus came
architect Adolf Loos, who, along with fabulist Scheerbart, introduced
modernist architectural discourse to Der Sturm. During the journals first
two years, the graphic art of Kokoschka and members of Die Brcke appeared
with increasing frequency.  In 1912, Walden institutionalized his
commitment to visual art by opening Der Sturm gallery near Potsdamer Platz.
Until it closed in 1928, the gallery hosted more than 170 shows and
initiated programs in a dozen countries, including Japan.

Appropriate to its name, the gallery caused a furor in the press. The first
exhibit featured expressionist painting by the Blaue Reiter of Munich
(Albert Bloch, Wassily Kandinsky, Paul Klee, August Macke, Franz Marc,
Gabriele Mnter). Walden seconded this act with the first exhibit of the
Italian Futurists (Umberto Boccioni, Carlo Carr, Luigi Russolo, Gino
Severini) in Germany. Walden, his second wife, Nell, Boccioni, and group
spokesman Filippo Marinetti drove a convertible through Berlins streets,
disseminating exhibition posters to cries of Evviva Futurista! This
performance complemented readings and recitals in the gallery, and
continued a tradition that predated Der Sturm. Already in 1901, Walden and
Lasker-Schler had collaborated on Teloplasma, a high-art-cabaret (and
failure); in 1904, Walden had initiated the Verein fr Kunst (society for
art), an enormously successful lecture and performance society, whose
guests included such eminent figures as Adolf Behne, Peter Behrens,
Gottfried Benn, Gustav Mahler, Georg Simmel, August Stramm, and Richard
Strauss. In 1912, Walden folded the Verein fr Kunst into the Sturm
gallerys programs, establishing a home for the periods most advanced art,
poetry, and ideas.

In 1913, following the tradition of the French Salon dautomne (1903+), Der
Sturm hosted the Erster Deutscher Herbstsalon, displaying 366 works of art
from twelve countries. The Herbstsalon is one of three monumental,
international surveys of modern art in 1912-1913 (the others are the 1912
Sonderbund exhibit in Cologne and the 1913 Armory Show in New York). A
radical feature of the Berlin show is that a woman, Sonia Delaunay,
exhibited more works (twenty-six) than any other living artist (her husband
Robert followed with twenty-one). Although Walden did not always support
women, his record shines next to his contemporaries. He granted Mnter
three solo shows (her more famous partner, Kandinsky, received no more),
and he promoted lesser-known women artists, such as Jakoba van Heemskerck
and Marthe Tour-Donas. Equally unusual is Waldens periodic support of
supposedly feminine media (decorative arts) and aesthetics (the
decorative or ornamental). Sonia Delaunays collection, for example,
included book covers, scarves, and lampshades along with paintings, and
Walden defended Klees painting, despite criticism of the latter as
decorative and ornamental, throughout the 1910s.

The careers of two giants of modern art are entwined with Der Sturm:
Kandinsky and Kurt Schwitters. In 1912, Kandinsky enjoyed his first solo
exhibition at the gallery, and Der Sturms new press published the first
monograph on the artist, Kandinsky, 1901-1913, in 1913. Schwitterss Merz
collages premiered at Der Sturm gallery in 1919, and he theorized Merz, a
creative mixture of materials and practices, in the main journal and its
subsidiary, Die Sturm-Bhne (storm stage). The latter took its name from
the Sturms theater society, coordinated by Rudolf Bluemner and Lothar
Schreyer from 1917 to 1921. Following Sturm tradition, all arts remained
integrated: the artist Schwitters studied acting with Bluemner and
discussed musical composition with Walden. Schwitterss Ursonata (1923-32),
a tour de force of performance poetry, is but one result.

For all its achievements, however, Der Sturm always faced adversaries, from
a dubious public to insolvency to later criticism from an overtly
politicized avant-garde. Suspicions remain about photographs of the
apparently prosperous Waldens during World War I. Some scholars believe
that Walden was able to continue his international programs during the war,
staging shows at home and in neutral countries, because of ties to
government intelligence. Although Walden supplied the art for the first two
exhibitions at the Galerie Dada in Zurich in 1917, some Berlin Dadaists,
especially Raoul Hausmann and Richard Huelsenbeck, deplored his commerce
and suspect politics. The Russian avant-gardist, Ivan Puni, staged a Sturm
installation avant la lettre in 1921, and revolutionary artists in
Hungary, Poland, and the Czech Republic modeled their journals on Der
Sturm, but the more ideologically pureor rigidconstructivists considered
Walden to be incurably bourgeois. Perhaps it surprised them when, ca. 1926,
Der Sturms pages began to reflect Waldens infatuation with the Soviet
Union. His interests no longer resonated with a local audience; the complex
closed, and the journal released its last issue in 1932. Walden moved to
the Soviet Union, where he contributed to Das Wort. In that Moscow-based
exile journal, Georg Luks famously debated Ernst Bloch and others over
expressionisms culpability in the rise of fascism. Walden vigorously
defended Der Sturm. He died in a Stalinist camp in 1941.

References and further readings

Birthlmer, A., A. von Hlsen-Esch, and G. Finckh. (eds.) (2012) Der Sturm.
Zentrum der Avantgarde, 2 vols., Wuppertal: von der Heydt-Museum.

Hodonyi, R. (2010) Herwarth Waldens Sturm und die Architektur, Bielefeld:
Aisthesis.
