
Charles Reznikoff (1894-1976)

Charles Reznikoff was a poet, prose writer, and playwright whose work
significantly contributed to American modernism.  Drawing on his heritage
as a New York City Jewish-American, Reznikoff, like his fellow
Objectivists Louis Zukofsky and George Oppen, used the resources of
modernist poetryspare lines, suppression of rhetoric, and attention to
daily lifeto explore Jewish history as well as the American urban
experience.  Particularly in works like Testimony (1965) and Holocaust
(1975), Reznikoff relied upon his legal training to establish the poet as a
witness, one who offers an account without judgment or praise.  In his own
words, the objectivist poet does not write directly about his feelings but
about what he sees and hears, [. . .] restricted almost to the testimony of
a witness in a court of law.  Because of these many influences,
Reznikoffs poetry offers a unique hybrid, moral, historical, and
testimonial modernism.

Reznikoff was born in Brooklyn, New York, to a Russian Jewish immigrant
family.  His parents were working class, and for much of Charless life
they ran a hat manufacturing business.  While attending public high school
he developed an interest in poetry.  After a year studying journalism at
the University of Missouri, Reznikoff decided to attend law school at New
York University.  Although he received his degree and passed the state bar
exam, Reznikoff soon left private practice.  He pursued graduate study in
law at Columbia University, eventually leaving to work in his parents
business.  For the rest of his life, Reznikoff earned a living through
various occupations, focusing much of his energy on his writing, always his
first commitment.  His legal training significantly influenced his work,
not only informing his emphasis on witness but also granting him access to
the documentary material that would make up Testimony.

In 1918, Reznikoff self-published his first book of poetry, and would
continue to publish regularly for the rest of his life.  The early poems of
Rhythms (1918) and Rhythms II (1919) reflect some of Reznikoffs signature
gestures: sparse, minimalist verses, usually untitled, which are poignant,
at times ironic, and always attentive.  Reznikoffs ear for speech rhythms
extracted poetic music from the language of daily life without dramatically
transforming it.  Additionally, his use of multiple perspectives in Rhythms
II initiates his lifelong experiments with other voices, allowing the
characters in his poems to offer their own testimony. The Jewish experience
emerges as a clear focus in A Fourth Group of Verse (1921), becoming
historical in later works like Israel (1929) and In Memoriam: 1933 (1934),
in which Reznikoff retells major events from ancient Israel and the Jewish
diaspora

In 1930, Reznikoff married journalist and Zionist Marie Syrkin, a lifelong
partnership.  In 1931, his new friend Louis Zukofsky edited a special issue
of Poetry magazine, which featured Reznikoff, William Carlos Williams,
George Oppen, and others.  In this issue Zukofsky coined the phrase
Objectivist.  Reznikoff, Zukofsky, and George and Mary Oppen would go on
to establish the Objectivist Press, which published Williams, Oppen, and
Reznikoff himself.

Reznikoffs late major works, the multi-volume Testimony: The United States
(1885-1915), Recitative (1965) and Holocaust (1975) amplify and radicalize
his poetics of witness.  In the first of these works, the poet turns
transcripts of U.S. court cases into verse, drawing the material from his
work on a legal encyclopedia.  The result is an alternative history of the
United States, one that reveals daily violence, suffering, and conflict in
painful detail.  Reznikoffs own experience as a Jewish-American perhaps
prompts his attention to the racial tensions underlying that violence; a
repeating section, entitled Negroes, has been called by Aldon Lynn
Nielsen the most substantial consideration given to black life by a white
poet during the modernist period.  Reznikoff later used the same
documentary approach with transcriptions from the Nuremberg and Eichmann
trials, producing Holocaust.

Reznikoffs influence on American poetry was not limited to the modernist
period.  As late as 1975, one year before his death by heart attack, he was
interviewed by Susan Howe [link to recording:
http://writing.upenn.edu/pennsound/x/Reznikoff.php], a sign of his
influence on Language poetry and other late century experimental movements.


Recent Editions and Select Criticism
Seamus Cooney, ed. The Poems of Charles Reznikoff, 1918-1975 (Jaffery, NH:
      Black Sparrow Press, 2005).
Holocaust (Jaffery, NH: Black Sparrow Press, 2007).
Stephen Fredman, A Menorah for Athena: Charles Reznikoff and the Jewish
      Dilemmas of Objectivist Poetry (Chicago: U of Chicago P, 2001).
Milton Hindus, ed. Charles Reznikoff: Man and Poet (Orono, ME: National
      Poetry Foundation and the University of Maine, 1984).


