
Ridge, Lola.

Born: 1873  Dublin, Ireland; Died: 1941  Brooklyn, New York

A proletarian modernist, the poet Lola Ridge is best known for her work
published between 1918 and 1922, which coincided with her editorship of
Broom and Others, and her salon in New York that hosted most of the leading
poets of the time, including Marianne Moore, William Carlos Williams and
Hart Crane. Four years before Eliot's bleak and anti-Semitic The Waste
Land, her equally long poem The Ghetto celebrated the otherness of the
Jewish Lower East Side, chronicling an era and prophesying the multi-ethnic
world of the twenty-first century. She was one of the first to delineate
the life of the poor in Manhattan and in particular, womens lives in New
York City. The title poem of her second book, Sun-up and Other Poems is a
striking modernist depiction of child's interior life. Harriet Monroe,
founder of Poetry, and William Rose Benet, founder of Saturday Review of
Literature, called Ridge a genius. Her poem Brooklyn Bridge greatly
influenced Hart Crane, and her late work shared Crane's concerns with
archaic language and mysticism. Her 1919 speech, Woman and the Creative
Will, anticipated Virginia Woolf's A Room of Her Own by ten years.

Born in Dublin, Ridge spent 23 years in New Zealand and was educated as a
visual artist at the Julian Ashton Academy in Sydney. By the time she
offered a manuscript to A.G. Stephens, the most influential publisher in
Australia, she had published nearly forty poems in prominent Australasian
magazines. Primarily ballads and traditional lyrics, these early poems
reflected the nascent nationalism and labor movements of the period.
Deciding to emigrate to America in 1908, she left behind her husband in New
Zealand and a son in San Francisco. She befriended Emma Goldman in New York
and spent several years organizing at the anarchist Ferrer Center and
founded and edited early issues of the Modern School magazine.

She traveled the U.S. for five years, returning to New York in 1918 where
she edited Margaret Sanger's Birth Control Review. The Ghetto And Other
Poems, her first book, was published that year, and represented a radical
departure from her early work, with emphasis on Imagism and free verse. The
salon she founded celebrated Alfred Kreymborg's Others, which she
rejuvenated. In keeping with the politically charged modernist milieu, she
entertained the revolutionary John Reed as well as Wallace Stevens. In 1922
Harold Loeb asked her to become the American editor for Broom, where she
mentored Hart Crane and Jean Toomer. When Loeb insisted that the expatriate
Gertrude Stein be included in her American issue, she resigned.

Her third book, Red Flag, published in 1927, was written at the height of
her interest in the Russian Revolution. Notable poems from this book
include: The Fifth Floor Window, for which she won Poetry's Guarantor
Prize, and the sonnet Electrocution.  1927 was also the year she was
arrested with Edna St. Vincent Millay at the demonstrations protesting the
execution of Nicola Sacco and Bartolomeo Vanzetti.

Although she refused editorship of New Masses, she remained on the
editorial board for many years. In 1930 she published the book-length poem
Firehead, written in six weeks at the artist colony Yaddo. An irregularly
metered account of the Crucifixion as told by witnesses, the book
represented a turn toward the mystical and received excellent reviews.
Stone Face, a poem on Tom Mooney that appeared in her last book, Dance of
Fire, was reproduced by the thousands and hung in labor halls to remind
organizers of his unjust imprisonment. One of the first four women poets to
receive a Guggenheim, Ridge was twice given the Shelley Award by the Poetry
Society of America.

In her later years she traveled alone to Baghdad and Mexico, searching for
inspiration for a final sequence of books entitled Lightwheel that she did
not complete. She never abandoned her interest in anarchist themes and
always maintained an international perspective. Her contributions were
buried in the wake of the New Critics' demotion of women, free verse, and
politics as a subject, as well as the rise of anti-radical political
feeling in America prior to World War II.

References and further reading:

Berke,Nancy. Women Poets on the Left: Lola Ridge, Genevieve Taggard,
Margaret Walker. Gainsville: UP of Florida, 2001.
Svoboda, Terese. Anything That Burns You: A Portrait of Lola Ridge, Radical
Poet. Tucson: Schaffner Press, 2016.
Tobin, Dan. ed. Light in Hand. Selected Early Poems. Quale Press. 2007.

List of Works:

The Ghetto and Other Poems. Huebsch. 1918.

Sun-Up and Other Poems. Huebsch. 1920. Lightning Source Inc, 2008

Red Flag. Viking. 1927.

Firehead. Payson & Clarke. 1929.

Dance of Fire. Smith & Haas. 1935.
