Taylor & Francis – Encyclopedia of Modernism



About you

[Salutation]

Peter

[Middle name]

Baker



[Enter your biography]



Texas A&M University



Your article

Rocha, Glauber (1939–1981)

[Enter any variant forms of your headword – OPTIONAL]

Glauber Rocha de Andrade (Vitória da Conquista, 1939–1981) was a Brazilian film critic, screenwriter, producer and director. Arguably the most important director of the cinema nôvo (New Cinema) movement of the 1960s and 1970s, he began his career as a film critic, writing for well-known Brazilian journals about Italian neorealism and the French New Wave—two crucial influences on his own work. His writings criticised Brazil's commercial cinema and called for a new type of film that would represent the reality of Brazilian life. His most famous essay in this regard is ‘Estética da Fome’ (‘An Esthetic of Hunger’, 1965). The essay reflects on the neo-colonial condition of Brazilian cinema through the analogy of the starvation of the Brazilian people and the intellectual starvation of its cinematic tradition; anti-colonial revolutionary violence is the only possible solution to these plights. This theoretical viewpoint is reflected in his Deu e o Diabo na Terra do Sol (Black God, White Devil, 1964), a film which earned him recognition on the international scene and in Brazil as the unchallenged leader of a new generation.

Glauber Rocha de Andrade (Vitória da Conquista, 1939–1981) was a Brazilian film critic, screenwriter, producer and director. Arguably the most important director of the cinema nôvo (New Cinema) movement of the 1960s and 1970s, he began his career as a film critic, writing for well-known Brazilian journals about Italian neorealism and the French New Wave—two crucial influences on his own work. His writings criticised Brazil's commercial cinema and called for a new type of film that would represent the reality of Brazilian life. His most famous essay in this regard is ‘Estética da Fome’ (‘An Esthetic of Hunger’, 1965). The essay reflects on the neo-colonial condition of Brazilian cinema through the analogy of the starvation of the Brazilian people and the intellectual starvation of its cinematic tradition; anti-colonial revolutionary violence is the only possible solution to these plights. This theoretical viewpoint is reflected in his Deu e o Diabo na Terra do Sol (Black God, White Devil, 1964), a film which earned him recognition on the international scene and in Brazil as the unchallenged leader of a new generation. Rocha continued to define the cinema nôvo movement with his filmic production throughout his life, but increased repression and censorship under Brazil's military dictatorship after 1964 made the criticism encoded in his films increasingly indirect. Many were produced abroad and in 1971 Rocha went into voluntary exile. Rocha was a determining influence on Brazilian cinema and a generative figure in the development of what came to be called Third Cinemas. 



List of Works (Selection)

Many of Glauber Rocha’s are not accessible to English speaking audiences. Where English subtitles are not available, it is stated with the entry. 

O pátio (short, 1958–9) (No English subtitles available)

A Cruz na Praça (short, 1959)

Barravento (The Turning Wind, 1961)

Deu e o Diabo na Terra do Sol (Black God, White Devil, 1964)

Amazonas, Amazonas (documentary short, 1965) (No English subtitles available)

Maranhão 66 (1966) (No English subtitles available)

Terra em Transe (Entranced Earth, 1967)

1968 (short, 1968) (No English subtitles available)

Câncer (1968 – 72) (No English subtitles available)

O Dragão da Maldade contra o Santo Guerreiro (Antonio das Mortes, 1969)

Der Leone Have Sept Cabeças (1969) (No English subtitles available)

Cabezas cortadas (Cutting Heads, 1970) (No English subtitles available)

História do Brasil (documentary, 1974) (No English subtitles available)

Claro (1975) (No English subtitles available)

Di Cavalcanti: Ninguém assistiu ao formidável enterro de sua ultima quimera, somente a ingratidão, essa pantera, foi sua companheira inseparável (documentary short, 1977) (No English subtitles available)

Jorjamado no cinema (documentary, 1977) (No English subtitles available)

Idade da Terra (The Age of the Earth, 1980) 

Further reading:

 (Hollyman)

(Johnson)

(Rocha)