
Roma citt aperta

Michela Russo (Texas A & M University)

Roma Citt Aperta ("Rome  Open  City".  Italy  1945,  b/w,  sound  100  min.
Drama). Directed by: Roberto Rossellini.

Inspired by the real story of don Luigi Morosini, an Italian  presbyter  and
partisan who joined the Italian Resistance movement and was  later  executed
by the Gestapo, the film was produced in the  aftermath  of  World  War  II,
immediately after the  Liberation  of  Rome  from  Nazi  occupation.  Coldly
received in Italy, the film had an immediate  success  abroad,  winning  the
Palm dOr at the 1946 Cannes Film Festival. Roma Citt Aperta is  considered
emblematic of Italian neorealism for its documentary style, the presence  of
non-professional actors, the combination of studio and non-studio  shooting,
the frequent use of deep focus and long  takes,  and  its  natural  mise-en-
scne. The suspenseful narrative is structured by the  parallel  editing  of
simultaneously  unfolding  events.  In  a  Rome  still  occupied  by  Nazis,
Communist Resistance leader Manfredi, modeled on the  historical  figure  of
Giorgio Amendola, is hunted by the Gestapo, and finds refuge in the home  of
Pina, his friend Francescos pregnant fiance.  During  a  search,  Manfredi
manages  to  escape,  but  Pina  is  fatally  shot  by  the  Nazis.  Marina,
Manfredis mistress, allows  the  two  friends  into  her  house  but  later
reports their presence to the Gestapo. The two  men  are  arrested  together
with  Don  Pietro  Pellegrini,  a  priest  and  active  supporter   of   the
Resistance. Tortured, Manfredi will die for not revealing  any  information,
while the priest will be shot for before the eyes of  the  children  of  the
parish, including Pinas son, who had already witnessed  the  death  of  his
mother.

The Italian Resistance is depicted with heroic, and sometimes comic,  tones.
One of the films climactic scenes is Pinas death; the interruption of  her
pregnancy allegorically alludes to the struggles of those engaged  with  the
difficult re-birth of the country. The film contains a message of  Christian
humanism and conveys a sense of hope for the reconstruction of  the  Italian
national self. The last scene, in which the children leave  the  scene  of
the priests shooting hugging each other, anticipates a brotherhood  yet  to
come.



References and further reading



Bondanella, P. E. (1993) The Films of Roberto Rossellini. Cambridge
[England]: Cambridge University Press.



Brunette, P. (1987) Roberto Rossellini. New York: Oxford University Press.



Forgacs, D. (2000) Rome Open City. London: BFI Pub.



Gallagher, T. (1998) The Adventures of Roberto Rossellini. New York: Da
Capo Press.



Gottlieb, S. (2004) Roberto Rossellini's Rome Open City. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.



Wagstaff, C. (2007) Italian Neorealist Cinema: An Aesthetic Approach.
Toronto: University of Toronto Press.



