
Rothko, Mark (born Marcus Yakovlevich Rothkowitz) (1903-1970)

Mark Rothko is one of the most celebrated painters from a group that
matured in 1940s USA, who were later dubbed 'The New York School'.  His
work became increasingly famous in the US and Europe during the 1950s, and
his status was solidified by a large retrospective at the Museum of Modern
Art in New York in 1962.  Rothko began his career as a figurative painter.
From 1938 he produced an innovative style that drew on Surrealism and
incorporated disparate sources from ancient Greek and Native American art
to Biblical imagery.  After 1945 his paintings became increasingly
abstract, moving towards the style that he is most associated with today.
These works involve soft, cloud-like rectangles of colour, painted in
multiple layers, which produce the appearance of glowing, shimmering light.
 Rothko had an uneasy relationship with art critics, collectors and
institutions.  In 1950 he was amongst a group known as 'The Irascibles,'
who protested that a juried exhibition of contemporary works at the
Metropolitan Museum of Art was hostile to 'advanced art.' In 1958 he
reneged on a major commission to produce murals for the Four Seasons Hotel
in New York, deciding that its atmosphere was inappropriate.

Rothko was born into a Jewish family in Dvinsk, Russia in 1903.  In later
years he often spoke of his family's fear regarding hostility towards Jews
in Russia, which led to violent attacks on many Jewish communities.
Rothko's father moved to Portland, Oregon in 1910, and his family followed
in 1913.  During his teenage years, Rothko regularly attended public
speeches by political activists, and became an anarchist.  He held this
commitment for many years to come.  In 1923 he moved to New York and began
taking classes at the Art Student's League.  He became interested in German
Expressionist painting, as well as the art of children.  For his first solo
exhibition at the Portland Museum in 1933, Rothko took the unusual step of
showing his paintings alongside work by child artists.  His paintings of
the 1930s focussed on faux-naive figures and urban scenes, with a sombre
tone that reflected the mood of the Great Depression.  He was vehemently
opposed to abstract art at this time.  He thought it was de-humanising
because it lacked meaningful content.

His new style of the 1940s was connected with an increasing interest in
mythology and the philosophy of Friedrich Nietzsche.  He combined a
distinctively modern approach with ancient imagery, and also worked in
larger formats than before, using a much wider range of techniques.  This
new approach began to gain public interest, leading to solo exhibitions at
the Art of This Century gallery in New York in 1945, and the San Francisco
Museum of Art in 1946.  This was also an important period of intellectual
ferment, when Rothko mingled with a group of artists that would later be
called 'The New York School'.  The ideas that these artists shared were
disseminated through the journals Possibilities and Tiger's Eye, which
Rothko contributed to in the late 1940s.  In 1949 he was a founding member
of The Club, an important venue for talks and discussions amongst artists.

His abstract works of the 1950s expanded in size again, giving viewers a
feeling of being enveloped by their layers of colour.  By this time Rothko
had abandoned politics.  However, he continued to reject the label
'abstract art,' claiming that his work was not abstract because it
contained a human meaning.  From the early 1960s his palette became darker,
and his paintings no longer displayed the shimmer of light which had
characterised his 1950s works.  In 1964, he was commissioned to create a
suite of paintings for a non-denominational chapel in Houston, Texas.
These 'black' paintings typify the solemnity and austerity of his later
practice.

References and Further Reading

Anfam, D. (1998), Mark Rothko: Works on Canvas, New Haven, Yale University
Press

Ashton, D. (2003), About Rothko, Cambridge: Da Capo Press

Breslin, J.A. (1993), Mark Rothko: A Biography, Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.

Chave, A. (2001), Mark Rothko: Subjects in Abstraction, New Haven: Yale
University Press.

Phillips G. & Crow T. (2005), Seeing Rothko, Washington D.C.: Getty
Research Institute.

Rothko, M. (2006), Writings on Art, New Haven: Yale University Press.

Weiss, J. (1998), Mark Rothko, New Haven: Yale University Press.


Image Suggestions:

Street Scene, 1936/7, National Gallery of Art (Washington D.C.)

Hierarchical  Birds, 1944, National Gallery of Art (Washington D.C.)

Untitled, 1957, National Gallery of Art (Washington D.C.)  NOTE: THERE ARE
TWO 'UNTITLED' WORK FROM THIS YEAR IN THEIR COLLECTION, I WOULD SUGGEST THE
BLUE AND GREEN ONE.

