
ROZANOV, Vasily (, ) (1856-1919)


      Leading writer, publicist, literary critic  and  philosopher  in  late
nineteenth and early twentieth century Russia. Born in  Vetluga,  Russia  in
1856, Rozanov remained in the provinces as a secondary school teacher  until
1893, when he gained a civil service post  in  St.  Petersburg,  Russia.   A
prolific and original thinker, Rozanovs path-breaking ideas  on  sexuality,
religion and the family made him one of the most  controversial  figures  of
his day. Writing at a time when  Russian  journalism  was  highly  partisan,
Rozanov confounded his contemporaries by publishing contradictory  views  in
liberal and conservative journals.  Around the turn of the century,  Rozanov
became preoccupied with the mystical nature of sexuality  in  ancient  pagan
and  Jewish  religious  practice.    Convinced   that   Orthodox   Christian
asceticism was destroying  Russian  society,  Rozanov  began  a  decade-long
campaign against the Russian Churchs  attitude  towards  marriage  and  the
family.  In  1912,  with  the  publication  of  his  literary   masterpiece,
Uedinennoe  (Solitaria),   Rozanov   transitioned   to   the   confessional,
aphoristic style that characterizes his last, and  most  famous,  period  of
creativity.  During the difficult years of the Russian  Revolution,  Rozanov
and his family took refuge near the  St.  Sergius-Trinity  Monastery,  where
the writer died in 1919.

      VasilyVasilevich Rozanov was born in Vetluga, Russia on 2 May 1856
into the family of a forester.  Orphaned in early adolescence, Rozanov was
taken into the care of his older brother, Nikolai. In 1880, as a student at
Moscow University, he married Apollinaria Suslova, a woman sixteen years
his senior.  Their unhappy marriage was never officially dissolvedSuslova
refused to grant the writer a divorce and in 1891 Rozanov was married
again, illegally, to Varvara Butiagina in a secret church ceremony.
      Rozanov self-published his first work, O ponimanii (On Understanding),
in 1886 while still a secondary school geography teacher in the Russian
provinces.  This dense and difficult 830-page philosophical treatise was
virtually ignored by the intellectual establishment.  Rozanov first
garnered critical attention in the early 1890s with the publication of
Mesto Khristianstvo v istorii (The Place of Christianity in History) and
Legenda o velikom inkvizitore F.M. Dostoevskogo (Dostoevskys Legend of the
Grand Inquisitor).  The latter work was a daring appraisal of the
philosophical and religious complexity of F.M. Dostoevskys novel, The
Brothers Karamazov.
      In 1893 Rozanov received a position in the civil service in St
Petersburg, Russia. In the capital city, Rozanov initially associated with
a conservative Slavophile circle devoted to defending the Tsarist
government and the Russian Orthodox Church against the attacks of the
liberal press.  As Rozanovs philosophy of religion grew increasingly
fixated on sexuality, however, he began to align himself with the decadent
school surrounding Dmitry MEREZHKOVSKY (there will be a link here to the
Merezhkovsky entry) and the journal Mir Isskustva (WORLD OF ART)
      Rozanov became a full-time professional writer in 1899, when A.S.
Suvorin hired him as a correspondent for the conservative weekly paper,
Novoe vremia (New Times). In the same year, Rozanov published a collection
of essays, Religia i Kultura (Religion and Culture), which testified to
the writers increasing hostility to the Orthodox Church and his
enthusiastic turn to ancient Egyptian, Greek and Jewish religious cults.
Rozanov's anti-Christian polemics culminated in 1911 with the publicaton of
V temnykh religioznikh luchakh (In Dark Religious Light).  Rozanov claimed
the 'dark face of Christ' had destroyed the possibility of joy on earth by
replacing the religion of sex and the family (Judaism) with the religion of
death (Christianity).  In contrast to Christ's asexuality, Rozanov
championed Judaism as the religion of procreation wherein God and man are
physically and spiritually united in the sexual act.
      In Uedinennoe (Solitaria, 1912), Rozanov's most acclaimed work,
religious and philosophical themes are masterfully interwoven with intimate
domestic anecdotes.  In this book and its sequels, Opavshie list'ia
(Fallen Leaves, 1913-1915) Rozanov endeavored to record the innermost
movements of thought as they occur, without the intereference of rational
discourse.  This groundbreaking stylistic device continued in Rozanovs
final publication, Apokalipsis nashevo vremeni (Apocalypse of Our Time,
1917-1918), a haunting masterpiece on the tragic collapse of imperial
Russia.
      Vasilii Rozanov moved with his family to the city of Sergeiv Posad
near Moscow in 1917 to escape the tumult of the Revolution in St.
Petersburg.  Impoverished and starving, he suffered a stroke on 24 November
1918 and died two months later.

References and Further Reading
Despite the renaissance in Rozanov studies now occurring  in  Russia,  there
are very few English-language translations, or  secondary  studies,  of  the
writers works.

List of Works by Rozanov in English Translation
Dostoevsky and the Legend of the Grand Inquisitor. Tr. Spencer E. Roberts.
Ithaca: CornellUniversityPress, 1972.

Four Faces of Rozanov: Christianity, Sex, Jews, and the Russian Revolution.
Tr. Spencer E. Roberts. New York: Philosophical Library, 1978.

Selections from Fallen Leaves. Tr. Boris Jakim and Laury Magnus. Chicago:
The Variable Press, 2003.

Solitaria.  Tr. S.S. Kotiliansky.  London: Wishart & Co, 1927.

The Apocalypse of Our Time, and Other Writings.  Tr. Robert Payne and
Nikita Romanoff. New York: Praeger, 1977.

Selection of critical works
Crone, Anna Lisa. Rozanov and the End of Literature: Polyphony and the
Dissolution of Genre in Solitaria and Fallen Leaves. Wrzburg: Jal, 1978.
An excellent study of the formal literary devices in Rozanovs famous
trilogy.

Mondry, Henrietta.Vasily Rozanov and the Body of Russian Literature.
Bloomington, Ind: Slavica, 2010.  An innovative cultural study on Rozanovs
appropriation of classic Russian literary figures.

Ure, Adam.Vasilii Rozanov and the Creation: The Edenic Vision and the
Rejection of Eschatology. New York: Continuum, 2011.  A much-needed study
on the theological and philosophical foundations of Rozanovs thought.

Sean Griffin, University of California, Los Angeles


Source URLs for images

Photograph
Rozanov posing for a photograph:
http://rozanov.lenin.ru/2.jpg
Portrait
Rozanov sitting:
www.tverlife.ru/img/news/43812/21550.jpg

-----------------------
Photograph of Rozanov, 1916.

Portrait of Rozanov byLeon Bakst, 1901


