
Rulfo, Juan Nepomuceno Carlos Prez Vizcano (1917-1986)

(Photo:        http://literofilia.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/05/Juan-Rulfo-
600x300.jpg)

Juan Rulfo was a Mexican writer and photographer and is  considered  one  of
the most influential writers of Spanish-language literature  in  the  modern
age. His literary production is mainly  limited  to  two  brief  works  -  a
collection of short stories, El Llano en llamas (The Burning Plain),  and  a
novel, Pedro Pramo - which sufficed to assign him a central place in  world
literature. Rulfo was a man of few words who in  his  writing  attempted  to
fulfill his ideal of a literary style  without  ornament.  His  stories  and
novel are masterpieces of prose, considered poetic prose  by  some,  where
direct descriptions are avoided and  every  word  is  calculated  to  depict
environments, characters and actions by  pure  insinuation  or  allusion  to
elements that they lack.

Rulfos early life was marked by his fathers assassination in 1923 and  his
mothers passing only a few years later, in 1927. At the age  of  8,  during
the unrest caused by the Revolution and the anti-clerical measures that  led
to the Cristero war (1926-1929), Rulfo remembers having discovered his  love
for reading, when the town priest  hid  his  library  in  his  grandmothers
house, to save it from being confiscated by the revolutionary  forces.  Here
Rulfo came across, among others, the  Scandinavian  writers  whom  he  often
mentioned as his closest influence (H. Laxness, K. Hamsun, S.  Lagerlf,  B.
Bjrnson). These sad and opaque authors provided Rulfo with the  necessary
physical and psychological environment to represent the life of the  Mexican
farmer.

As a writer, Rulfo  was  extremely  self-critical  and  used  to  write  and
rewrite his texts many times only to finally discard them  altogether.  Very
few texts survived this process and were handed in  for  publication,  while
many others remained unpublished or  were  destroyed.  Rulfo  published  his
first work in 1945, the short story La vida no es muy seria en sus  cosas,
which appeared in  the  journal  Amrica.  In  the  following  years,  Rulfo
published a series of other stories that were collected in  the  volume  The
Burning Plain (1953). In 1955, Rulfo published his  first  and  only  novel,
Pedro Pramo, the fragmented tale of a deserted Mexican ghost-town  and  its
tyrannical cacique, or land baron. By means of an intricate  interplay  of
literary voices, Rulfo in this work generates an atmosphere of  reality  and
illusion with characters hovering between life and death.  This  novel  soon
came  to  be  considered  one  of  the  most  innovative  works  of   modern
literature, and marked a clean break  with  the  literary  past  in  Mexico,
where until then the regionalist novels  of  the  Revolution  had  been  the
order of the day.

Despite his evident  literary  talent,  Rulfo  never  considered  himself  a
professional writer and always held other jobs, even quite distant from  the
literary field. His family expected him to go to Law school, but after  only
a few years at university, Rulfo abandoned his studies and decided to go  to
work. At the age of 18, he was hired as an agent at the immigrations  office
in Mexico City, where he was to identify illegal immigrants, a job which  he
qualified as rather unpleasant detective work. In 1947, he accepted a  job
in a private  corporation,  as  a  travelling  salesman  of  car  tires.  He
travelled all over Mexico, which gave him a chance to see  the  country  and
take photographs, another of his great passions. From  1963  and  until  the
end of his life, Rulfo was employed at the Instituto  Nacional  Indigenista,
in Mexico City, where he edited  an  important  collection  of  ancient  and
contemporary Mexican anthropology. Since 1948 he had been married  to  Clara
Aparicio Rulfo, with whom he had four children.

Rulfo looked towards Scandinavia  and  the  European  literary  avant-gardes
(Kafka, Joyce, Woolf) to renew the themes and  strategies  of  his  national
literature and express the Mexican reality. His literary aim was  also  that
of freeing Mexican literature from the yoke of Spanish  influence.  To  him,
the main reason for the lack of innovation in  Mexican  literature  was  the
fact that it nourished  itself  solely  on  Spanish  writers,  whose  world,
mentality, rhetoric and pomposity were too distant  from  Mexican  life  and
thought. Rulfo consciously sought to create more unsophisticated  characters
and  write  in  a  straightforward   language,   among   other   things   by
systematically avoiding the use of adjectives.

In his works, Rulfo explores central  themes  of  his  contemporary  Mexican
society, such as  the  Revolution,  the  Cristero  war,  the  agrarian  land
reform, the destruction and isolation of life outside the  big  cities,  the
powerlessness of  Mexican  farmers  and  the  geographical  and  existential
distance of their  lives  with  regards  to  the  government  and  political
system. But the true innovation of his writing is no  doubt  the  linguistic
and  literary  experimentation  he  embarked  on:  purifying  literature  by
eliminating all superfluous elements,  both  in  linguistic  and  thematic
terms.

In addition to his writings, Rulfo was also  a  very  skilled  photographer,
and  his  photographs  were  published  already  during  his  lifetime.  The
relation between his photography  and  literary  technique  has  often  been
noted, since Rulfos two main works have a strong visual quality and  easily
lend themselves to being translated  into  film,  something  attempted  with
several of his short stories as well as his novel. Rulfo also composed  some
texts directly for the cinema, such as  El  despojo,  filmed  in  1960  by
Antonio Reynoso, and La frmula secreta, filmed in 1964  by  Rubn  Gmez.
However, although he was a great lover of  the  cinema  and  even  acted  in
small parts in some Mexican films, Rulfo was never  satisfied  with  any  of
the cinematic versions of his works. The cinema, in the end, turned  out  to
be an inappropriate means to represent his intricate fictional worlds.



Complete Works

Toda la Obra. Edicin crtica. Madrid: ALLCA XX,  Paris:  UNESCO,  Archivos.
1996.



List of Works

El Llano en llamas (1953)

Pedro Pramo (1955)

El gallo de oro y otros textos para cine (1980)



Filmatizations of Rulfos work

Talpa, Alfredo B. Crevenna, 1955. (Based on Talpa)

El gallo de oro, Roberto Gavaldn, 1964. (Based on  El  gallo  de  oro,  The
Golden Cock)

Pedro Pramo, Carlos Velo, 1966.

No oyes ladrar los perros?, Franois Reichenbach, 1974. (Based on No  dogs
bark)

Pedro Pramo: El hombre de La Media Luna, Jos Bolaos, 1976.

Pedro Pramo, Salvador Snchez, 1981.

El imperio de la fortuna, Arturo Ripstein, 1985. (Based on The Golden Cock)

Diles que no me maten!, Freddy Sisso, 1985 (Based  on  Tell  them  not  to
kill me!)

Los confines, Mitl Valdez, 1987. (Based on Talpa, Tell them not  to  kill
me! and an extract from Pedro Pramo)

Un pedazo de noche, Roberto Rochn, 1995. (Based on Un pedazo de noche)

Paso del Norte, Roberto Rochn, 2002. (Based on Paso del Norte)



Translations into English

Juan Rulfo, The Burning Plain and other stories,  translated  by  George  D.
Schade, Austin: University of Texas Press, 1967.

Juan Rulfo, Pedro Pramo, translated  by  Lysander  Kemp,  New  York:  Grove
Press, 1959.

Juan Rulfo, Pedro  Pramo,  translated  by  Margaret  Sayers  Peden  with  a
foreword by Susan Sontag, New York: Grove Press, 1994.



References and Further Reading

Roff, Reina. Autobiografa  armada.  Buenos  Aires:  Ediciones  Corregidor,
1973.

Vital, Alberto. Noticias sobre Juan Rulfo. 2003. (photography book)

Saladrigas, Robert. Voces del boom. Barcelona: Alfabia, 2012.



Material on the net

Diles   que   no   me   maten   and   Luvina   read   by    Rulfo    on:
www.archivosonoro.org

Juan Rulfos official webpage:
http://www.clubcultura.com/clubliteratura/clubescritores/juanrulfo/home.htm

Pedro Pramo. Carlos Velo. 1966. (complete film:
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h1iv3MWPyE8&feature=related)

Interview with Juan Rulfo by Joaqun Soler Serrano (1977):
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=V74yJztkx-c&feature=related



Timeline

1917  Juan Rulfo is born in Sayula, Mexico.

1923  Rulfos father is killed.

1927  Death of his mother. Rulfo and his brother are sent to a boarding
school in Guadalajara.

1936  Rulfo moves to Mexico City.

1941  Moves back to Guadalajara.

1945  Publishes his first short stories.

1946  Moves back to Mexico City to work for the tire company Goodrich
Euzkadi.

1948  Marries Clara Aparicio Rulfo. Starts to travel around Mexico as a
salesman and intensifies his activity as a photographer.

1949  For the first time, publishes 11 photographs in the journal Amrica.

1953  Publishes the collection of 15 short stories, El Llano en Llamas.

1955  Publishes his novel, Pedro Pramo.

1957  Is awarded the Xavier Villaurrutia Prize for Pedro Pramo.

1970  Receives the National Prize for Literature.

1980  Publication of El gallo de oro (The Golden Rooster), a collection of
some texts for the cinema and a short novel.

1983  Receives the Prince of Asturias Award.

1986  Dies in his home in Mexico City.

