
Abd al-Sabour, Salah
Mahmoud AA Ibrahim
And
Sally Hammouda
[pic]

Muhammad Salah El-Din `Abd al-Sabour (19311981) a  renowned  Egyptian  poet
and dramatist, was born in al-Sharqia County of the Delta region  in  Egypt.
`Abd al-Sabour started writing poetry at the age of thirteen  and  developed
his skill at  university.  As  a  secondary  school  student,  he  showed  a
noticeable interest in languages, literature  and  politics.  He  also  took
part in demonstrations against  British  occupation,  and  in  1949  he  was
arrested at the age of eighteen. After  earning  a  degree  in  Arabic  from
Cairo University in 1951, Abd al-Sabour worked in journalism and  co-edited
Al-Thaqafa (Culture) magazine, in  which  he  published  several  poems  and
short stories, until January 1953. He later served as the  director  of  the
General Egyptian Book Organization. During his study at Cairo University  he
enthusiastically joined The Literary Society and became one of its  active
members. Though he wrote short stories and philosophical fragments, he  soon
realized that poetry was the literary genre in which he excelled.

`Abd al-Sabour started to use this poetic talent in  writing  drama  in  the
early 1960s, but his plays have enjoyed little attention from modern  Arabic
drama critics, which could be attributed to the fact that critics have  paid
greater  attention  to  poetry.  Consequently,  `Abd  al-Sabour  focused  on
writing poetry, making him better known in modern  Arabic  literature  as  a
poet than as a dramatist. His ability to smoothly shift  from  one  literary
genre to another was one of his most  distinguishing  characteristics  as  a
multi-talented writer. Supported by his ability to lend his creative  poetic
talents to the genre of drama, `Abd al-Sabour  wrote  five  verse  plays  in
less than a decade between 1964 and 1973.

Among other Arab poets, `Abd al-Sabour was particularly  influenced  by  the
prominent Abu al-Tayyib al-Mutanabbi (915-965  AD),  and  Abu  al-`Ala'  al-
Ma'arri (973- 1057 AD). In addition, despite  being  faithful  to  his  Arab
tradition, he had a strong interest in Western culture and  literature,  and
was particularly influenced by the works of T. S. Eliot. He adopted  Eliots
approach of free verse (al-Shi`r al-Hurr), wrote critical essays on  Eliot
and translated two of his plays. 1957 his first  collection  of  poetry  Al-
Nass Fi Biladi (People in  my  Country)  using  free  verse  was  published,
catapulting the poet  into  fame.  It  caught  both  readers  and  critics
attention alike for its use of unique imagery and everyday common  language.
It broke away from the constricting structure of  Arabic  classical  poetry.
The restrictions of number of feet per line and rigidity of  rhyme  were  no
longer issues with the free verse movement, which started  in  Europe.  `Abd
al-Sabour put to use  this  new,  flexible  verse  form  which  allowed  for
dramatic poetry and which he refined to use in his poetic drama.  His  style
of free verse was regarded as a revolution against the  long  tradition  and
history of rhymed verse in Arabic. Therefore, he is considered  one  of  the
pioneers of free verse in Egypt.

`Abd al-Sabour was also influenced by German  playwrights  and  critic,  and
Antonin Artauds Theatre of the Absurd. These influences marked  his  search
for new forms of drama to fit both the new language he wrote in and the  new
conditions of the society. He experimented with the dramatic form, wrote  of
the  poor  class,  presented  themes  of  persecution  and  injustice,   and
documented the need to relieve humans  from  tyranny.  He  also  touched  on
issues related to the audience and  their  awareness  and  participation  in
shaping things around them.

Masat al-Hallaj (The Tragedy of  al-Hallaj,  1964)  (translated  under  the
title Murder in Baghdad) represents `Abd al-Sabours  dramatic  masterpiece,
for which he was granted the State Incentive Award for Theatre in  1966.  It
infuses myth and folklore with mysticism  and  existentialist  thought.  The
play is an adaptation of the story of the trial and execution of Mansur  al-
Hallaj (c. 858-922AD), a mystic Sufi poet and political agitator during  the
end of the Abbasid Dynasty. The will of the individual,  Al-Hallaj,  is  set
in opposition to the corrupt politicized religious  will  of  the  ruler  of
Baghdad. Al-Hallajs execution is punishment for his public critique of  the
evils of the ruling regime. The play covertly unveils the assumed  democracy
of the contemporary ruling regime of Egypt, using an old story from  Islamic
history to cover the authors criticism of the regime. With this  work  `Abd
al-Sabour showed that in addition to being  an  accomplished  poet,  he  was
also a committed playwright.

In addition to his masterpiece Masat al-Hallaj, `Abd al-Sabour  wrote  four
other plays: Musafiru Lail (Night Traveler) (1968), Al-Amira  Tantazir  (The
Princess Awaits), Laila wal-Majnoun (Laila  and  the  Madman)  (1971),  and
Bad an Yamut al-Malik (After the King Dies) (1973).  His  plays  are  often
dramatically well-constructed and have the same strong attentiveness as  his
poetry. In his drama, he brings out in a  highly  philosophical  manner  the
different attitudes to resisting  evil  in  life,  and  shows  the  conflict
people face to fulfil this duty: action or non-action, sword or  word.  This
philosophical concept of the opposition between  the  word  and  the  action
runs through all his plays and it  is  a  central  guiding  thread  that  is
systematically developed in his later plays.

As a poet, he published six collections of verse: al-Nas fi  Biladi  (People
in my Country, 1957); Aqulu Lakum (I Say to You, 1961); Ahlam  al-Faris  al-
Qadim (Dreams of the  Ancient  Knight,  1964);  Taammulat  fi  Zaman  Jarih
(Reflections on a Wounded Age, 1969); Shajar al-layl  (Night  Trees,  1974);
and al-Ibhar fi al-Dhakira (Sailing in Memory, 1979).  His  works  admirably
combine attention to technical considerations with a  commitment  to  social
justice.

In addition to  poetry  and  poetic  drama,  `Abd  al-Sabour  also  produced
several  critical  writings  and   literary   studies   where   he   tackled
intellectual and artistic issues in a broad human context. He  paid  special
attention to contemporary Egyptian thought. He also  wrote  critical  essays
for Roza al-Yousif and Sabah al-Khair magazines and Al-Ahram newspaper.  For
example, he wrote his own biography, Hayati f l-shir (My life  in  Poetry,
1969) and numerous works of criticism, including Qiraa Jadida  li  Shirina
al-Qadim (A new Reading of our Old Poetry, 1968), in which  he  reflects  on
themes and imagery in the ancient Arabic poetic heritage.

Salah `Abd al-Sabours verse and poetic plays exhibit a  talent  for  mixing
the absurd, the modern, the mythical, and the mystic. He  experimented  with
language in verse, freeing it from restrictions and  confinements.  He  used
those tools to depict modern mans dilemma and the fragmentation  of  modern
experience.

References and further reading
Abd al-Hayy, Amad (1988). Shir Salah Abd al-Sabour al-Ghinai: Al-
Mawqif wa al-Adah, Cairo, Al-Hayah al-Misriyya al-`Amma li al-Kitab.
`Abd al-Sabour, Salah (1991). Al-A`mal al-Kamilh li Salah Abd al-Sabour,
Cairo, Al-Hayah al-Misriyya al-`Amma li al-Kitab.
 ------- and Khalil Seman (1972). Murder in Baghdad: Prize-Winning Verse
Play in Two Acts. Arabic Translation Series of the Journal of Arabic
Literature. Leiden: Brill,
Amir, Madah (1984). Qiyam fanniyya wa-Jamaliyya fi Shir Sal Abd al-
Sabour Dirasa Tahliliya wa Jamaliyya hawla al-Fann wa al-Fikr. Cairo, Al-
Hayah al-Misriyya al-`Amma li al-Kitab.
Attar, Samar (1967). The Influence of T.S. Eliot on Salah Abdel Sabour.
Halifax: Dalhousie University.
Azouqa, Aida (2005) Federico Garca Lorca and Sal Abd al-abr as
Composers of Modern Ballads: A Comparative Study Journal of Arabic
Literature, Vol. 36, No. 2 (2005), pp. 188-223.
Jayyar al-, Midhat (1986). Jamaliyyat al-Makan fi Masrah Salah Abd al-
Sabour, (The Poetics of Place in the Drama of Sal Abd al-abr.)
Journal of Comparative Poetics, No. 6 Poetics of Place, Spring 1986, pp. 26-
44.
Jayyusi, Salma Khadra (1987). ed. Modern Arabic Poetry: An Anthology. New
York: Columbia University Press.
Sakkout El-, Hamdi (2001). Salah Abd Al-Sabur: Bibliography. Cairo:
American University of Cairo.
Shalaby, Mahmoud (2013). Politics and Poetics in the Drama of al Abd
al-abr and Wole Soyinka. PhD Dissertation, University of Edinburgh.

