Taylor & Francis – Encyclopedia of Modernism



About you

[Salutation]

Amanda

[Middle name]

Rath



[Enter your biography]



[Enter the institution with which you are affiliated]



Your article

Sadali, Ahmad (1924 – 1987)

[Enter any variant forms of your headword – OPTIONAL]

Ahmad Sadali was an iconic figure of the Bandung School and remains a key influence as a pioneer in modern abstract painting in Indonesia. Sadali, along with But Mochtar, Mochtar Apin, and Srihadi Soedarsono, was among the first generation of Indonesian students in the Bandung School. His early work of the 1950s demonstrates the direct influence of his teacher, Dutch painter Ries Mulder (1909-1973), whose own work was influenced by the Cubist work of Jacques Villon (1875-1963). Immediately upon graduation in 1953, Sadali became one of the first Indonesian lecturers of the Academy. Sadali was a key figure in the development of a modern Islamic art and its discourse in Indonesia, for which the principles of abstraction in modern painting were well suited. A devout Muslim and the son of a founder of the Garut chapter of Muhammadiyah, Sadali perceived painting as a spiritual act, as a way of seeking God’s blessing, and as imbued with tasawuf (inner mystical quality). He referred to his paintings as visual meditations, and the act of painting as a form of zikir (repetitive acts leading to a mindfulness of God). 

Ahmad Sadali was an iconic figure of the Bandung School and remains a key influence as a pioneer in modern abstract painting in Indonesia. Sadali, along with But Mochtar, Mochtar Apin, and Srihadi Soedarsono, was among the first generation of Indonesian students in the Bandung School. His early work of the 1950s demonstrates the direct influence of his teacher, Dutch painter Ries Mulder (1909-1973), whose own work was influenced by the Cubist work of Jacques Villon (1875-1963). Immediately upon graduation in 1953, Sadali became one of the first Indonesian lecturers of the Academy. Sadali was a key figure in the development of a modern Islamic art and its discourse in Indonesia, for which the principles of abstraction in modern painting were well suited. A devout Muslim and the son of a founder of the Garut chapter of Muhammadiyah, Sadali perceived painting as a spiritual act, as a way of seeking God’s blessing, and as imbued with tasawuf (inner mystical quality). He referred to his paintings as visual meditations, and the act of painting as a form of zikir (repetitive acts leading to a mindfulness of God). 



Sadali’s works become increasingly abstract and devoid of narrative following his studies in the United States as a Rockefeller Foundation grant recipient in 1956-57. He studied painting and arts education at the Iowa State University, and at Columbia University and the Art Students League in New York. During his tenure as lecturer, professor and later Dean of the Fine Arts Department at ITB, Sadali was known for his innovations in the medium and practice of painting. Influencing several generations of ITB students he introduced new materials considered unconventional by preexisting standards to build thick textures onto the surface plane, as well as the use of powdered pigments, and gold paint and gold leaf. Besides numerous solo and group exhibitions in country and internationally, beginning in the late 1960s he participated, along with fellow ITB artist, A.D. Pirous, in many group exhibitions of specifically Islamic artists. 



Further reading:

 (Iskandar)

(George)

(Holt)

(Spanjaard)