Taylor & Francis – Encyclopedia of Modernism



About you

[Salutation]

Anneka 

[Middle name]

Lenssen



[Enter your biography]



[Enter the institution with which you are affiliated]



Your article

Ṣalat al-Fann al-Ḥadith al-Ālamı (Art Moderne International) (established Damascus, Syria, 1960)

[Enter any variant forms of your headword – OPTIONAL]

Ṣalat al-Fann al-Ḥadīth al-ﬁĀlamı (Gallery of International Modern Art, or Art Moderne International (AMI)) was the first private art gallery in Syria. Launched by brothers Muhammad and Mahmoud Daadoush in Damascus in October 1960, the gallery served as a social hub for artistic and intellectual activity and a promotional office for Syria’s modern artists. It was centrally located in Yusuf al-Azmeh Square and provided a range of artistic services: biweekly exhibitions, literary evenings, and publicity stunts such as a talent search for an artists’ ‘muse’, as well as work in the applied fields of décor, advertising, and printing.

Ṣalat al-Fann al-Ḥadīth al-ﬁĀlamı (Gallery of International Modern Art, or Art Moderne International (AMI)) was the first private art gallery in Syria. Launched by brothers Muhammad and Mahmoud Daadoush in Damascus in October 1960, the gallery served as a social hub for artistic and intellectual activity and a promotional office for Syria’s modern artists. It was centrally located in Yusuf al-Azmeh Square and provided a range of artistic services: biweekly exhibitions, literary evenings, and publicity stunts such as a talent search for an artists’ ‘muse’, as well as work in the applied fields of décor, advertising, and printing. The gallery launched the Damascus careers of a number of Syrian artists, including Fateh al-Moudarres and Louay Kayyali, and gave early exhibitions to artists such as Naﬁim Ismail, Julianos Kattinis, Abdelqadar Arnaout, Nazir Nabaa, Asma Fayoumi, and Asaad Arabi. It also cultivated attention from international audiences, including in March 1962 organising a showcase of Syrian painters for display in Beirut, Lebanon, and in October of the same year hosting Italian gallerist Claudio Bruni of the Medusa Gallery. The gallery closed in 1965. Mahmoud Daadoush briefly reopened it in a new location in 1968, then launched a new gallery, Ornina, in 1971. 



Further reading:

 (Alloun)