
Author: Ndiouga Benga

Samb, Issa (b. 1945 Dakar, Senegal-)

Born in Dakar, Senegal, Issa Samb is a sculptor,  a  painter,  an  actor,  a
performance artist, a philosopher, a writer and a critic who is  also  known
as Joe Ouakam or  Joe  Ramangelissa  Ouakam.  He  studied  art  at  Institut
National des Arts and philosophy and law at Universit de Dakar in the  late
1960s. Very early, he developed a liking for understanding  the  meaning  of
symbols. In 1974 he founded,  with  a  group  of  artists  (El  Hadj  Moussa
Babacar Sy, known as El Sy, Guibril  Andr  Diop,  Bouna  Sye),  filmmakers
(Djibril Diop Mambety),  writers  (Theirno  Sadou  Sall),  the  Laboratoire
AgitArt.  The aim of  the  Laboratoire  was  to  transform  the  nature  of
artistic practice from a formalist, object-bound  sensibility  to  practices
based  on  experimentation  and  agitation,  process  rather  than  product,
ephemerality rather than permanence. With a focus on the  unexpected  aspect
of actions, Laboratoire AgitArt was characterised by  its  critical  stance
towards institutional power, of the Negritudes ideology and the  Senghorian
field of cultural production, such as the cole de  Dakars  painters.  Issa
Samb is a symbolic figure and patron of art in Senegal.

Issa Samb lives in Dakar within his home-atelier, which combines  all  sorts
of objects: a permanent exhibition that  varies  on  a  daily  basis,  using
trash,  other  recycling  material  and  found  objects  such  as  chiffons,
bottles, caps, cans and metal parts, questioning accepted  notions  of  fine
arts as durable, immortal objects separated from life. Issa Samb insists  in
the fact that the objects have no existence  except  in  relation  to  their
environment. The process of creation is more  important  than  the  finished
product. When I make a piece, [] I  have  total  freedom  to  do  creative
work. Therefore, others have total freedom to say, think or give  their  own
interpretation. I  forbid  myself  all  forms  of  prohibitions,  background
stories, explanations, interrogations. Samb  makes  frequent  references  to
political figures and social issues of postcolonial Africa, using  practices
of collage and assemblage. He has never sought to be  exhibited,  preferring
to show his work in his home  for  more  than  forty  years  to  escape  the
conformism of exhibition spaces. He co-founded the Galerie  Tenq    Village
des Arts.  He  is  the  author  of  numerous  plays,  poems  and  essays.  A
retrospective of his work was held at the National Gallery, Dakar  in  2010.
His work has been included in exhibitions such as  dOCUMENTA  (13),  Kassel,
2012, Biennale de lArt Africain Contemporain, DakArt, 2008  and  2012  and
Seven Stories of Modern Art in Africa, Whitechapel Gallery, London,  1995.


































Issa Samb, Laboratoire AgitArt: Plekhanov  in  the  Republique  of  Madmen
(workshop theatre) in Kouoh, K. (ed.) (2013) Word! Word? Word! Issa  Samb
and the Undecipherable Form. Parole! Parole?  Parole!  Issa  Samb  et  la
forme indchiffrable, Office for Contemporary ArtNorway Oslo, Raw  Material
Company Dakar, Berlin: Sternberg Press, p. 331.













Some works of Issa Samb in Dixime Biennale de lArt Africain Contemporain,
DakArt 2012, Tribute to Joe Ouakam, www.biennaledakar.org/2012.



Selected list of works

     Filmography

    - 2010: Lumire sur Ndar. Portrait du Pre Jean  Vast  (1921-2005),  by
      Mansour Kb (Image et Vie).
    - 2001: La  Double  Lumire,  by  Jean  Michel  Bruyre  (Vido.  54mn,
      colours. Coproduction ZKM, CICV, Epidemic, LFK-lafabriks)
    - 2000: Les 4 Trous du langage, by Jean Michel Bruyre (Vido.  60  mn,
      B&W and colours. DVcam. Coproduction CICV, LFK-lafabriks).
    - 1999: La fte silencieuse, by Jean Michel Bruyre (Vido. 26mn, B&W.
      DV. Coproduction CICV, LFK-lafabriks, Laboratoire AgitArt).
    - 1999: Elements of a Naked Chaise, by  Jean  Michel  Bruyre  (35  mm,
      57mn, B&W and colours. Coproduction CICV, LFK-lafabriks)
    - 1995: Impressions, by Jean Michel Bruyre (Vido. 15mn, colours.  Hi8
      Production FDMdropper).
    - 1992: Hynes, by Djibril  Diop  Mambty  (Screenplay,  110  minutes.
      Senegal, France, Suisse, Cinmathque  Afrique  (Cultures  France)/ADR
      Productions/MK2 Diffusion/Cinart-Cinlibre/Thelma Film  AG/Maag  Daan
      Film & TV/California Newsreel)
    - 1990: An Al, Toto Bissainthe (Collectif 2004, Images KS Visions)
     Books

    - 2004: Poto-Poto Blues, Dakar: Les Editions Feu de Brousse.
    - 2009: Les criquets (Thtre), Dakar: Les Editions Feu de Brousse.


References and further reading

Dixime   Biennale   de   lArt   Africain   Contemporain,   DakArt   2012,
www.biennaledakar.org/2012

Harney, E. (2004) In Senghors Shadow. Art, Politics and the Avant-Garde  in
Senegal, 1960-1995, Durham: Duke University Press.

Kouoh,  K.  (ed.)  (2013)  Word!  Word?   Word!   Issa   Samb   and   the
Undecipherable Form. Parole!  Parole?  Parole!  Issa  Samb  et  la  forme
indchiffrable,  Office  for  Contemporary  ArtNorway  Oslo,  Raw  Material
Company Dakar, Berlin: Sternberg Press.

