
Author: Allen F. Roberts



Samb, Mamadou Pape (1951-2014)



Mamadou Pape Samb, better known as Papisto Boy, was a Senegalese street
artist celebrated locally and internationally. He moved to Dakar as an
orphan of ten and would spend the next forty years living in an informal
fishing village squeezed between factories in Dakars portside industrial
park of Bel-Air. Papistos greatest artistic accomplishment was a two-
hundred-meter-long mural covering the exterior walls of a fish-processing
plant. His portraits and narrative vignettes celebrated global heroes of
human rights, and Papisto greatly enjoyed recounting compelling stories
about those depicted to local children or passers-by. The remarkable
qualities of Papistos work were recognized in the late 1970s and he was
brought to West Germany to exhibit his paintings in 1980. Later he
participated in Dakars Set/Setal youth-empowering artistic revolution of
the late 1980s. His works figured prominently in the exhibition A Saint in
the City: Sufi Arts of Urban Senegal that traveled to six U.S. museums
from 2003 through 2008, and in Urban Islam seen in Amsterdam (2004) and
Basel (2006). Papistos last major work was a 2006 mural commissioned for
the outer wall of the French Cultural Center of Dakar.



The remarkable qualities of Papistos work were recognized in the late
1970s and he was brought to West Germany to exhibit his paintings in 1980.
Later he participated in Dakars Set/Setal youth-empowering artistic
revolution of the late 1980s. His works figured prominently in the
exhibition A Saint in the City: Sufi Arts of Urban Senegal that traveled
to six U.S. museums from 2003 through 2008, and in Urban Islam seen in
Amsterdam (2004) and Basel (2006). Papistos last major work was a 2006
mural commissioned for the outer wall of the French Cultural Center of
Dakar.



Papistos life was never easy, and after his community in Bel-Air was razed
by city officials in 2002, his existence grew increasingly precarious until
illness without formal healthcare led to his demise. Until his last days,,
though, Papisto remained an exuberant public intellectual, and despite his
few years of formal educationas he explained, he was expelled from primary
school because all he wanted to do was drawhe brought astonishing
erudition to his painting. Through conversations with Senegalese university
friends and the literature they lent him, Papisto depicted individuals
whose histories he hoped would inspire the inhabitants of his Bel-Air
community. No subject was more dear to him than Sheikh Amadou Bamba (1853-
1927), the Sufi saint central to the Mouride Way that Papisto followed so
fervently. He painted many portraits of Bamba surrounded by other notable
persons from Gandhi to Bob Marley, Gerhard Hansen (the 19th-century
Norwegian physician who identified the cause of leprosy) to Martin Luther
King. All were Bambas emissaries to Papistos reckoning, for in their own
ways they exemplified and furthered the saints teachings of religious
tolerance, dedication to family, hard work, intellectual quest, and inner
peace. The artist Senegalized these world figures on his own terms,
hoping that his paintings would bring the urban poor so readily invisible
to so many, faith to keep living and working, as he explained. Papisto
was a mild, generous, and witty man wise beyond words, and his
Modernismhowever discrepantremains an expressive legacy for all the
worlds downtrodden.





References and Further Reading



Diouf, M. (1992) Fresques murales et criture de lhistoire: Le Set/Setal
 Dakar, Politique africaine 46: 41-54.



Fichte, H., and L. Mau (1980) Die Wanderbilder des Papisto Boy, Frankfurt:
Qumram.



http://www.fowler.ucla.edu/passport/papisto.htm.



Roberts, A. F., and M. N. Roberts (2003) Walls that Speak: Public Art
and Postcolonial Memory, in A Saint in the City: Sufi Arts of Urban
Senegal, Los Angeles: UCLA Fowler Museum, 122-149.







[pic]



Narrative panel from the Bel-Air (Dakar, Senegal) mural of Mamadou Pape
Samb (Papisto Boy). As the artist explained, a black panther protects
Nelson Mandela who wears the crown of New Yorks Statue of Liberty, while
Jimmy Hendrix contemplates Mandelas courage as well as the mystical powers
of his own guitar music that he played as an emissary of Sheikh Amadou
Bamba. A bleeding map of Africa bears the message I heard a cry, heard
like a cry from a far-off country! Save my child.



Vignette of streetside mural, house paint on cracked concrete wall, approx.
300x210cm.



Photograph 1998, Dakar Senegal, M. N. Roberts and A. F. Roberts with
permission.





