
Serialism/Twelve-Tone Technique

Arnold Whittall

A way of composing music that involves replacing major and minor scales
with a fixed ordering of the pitches of the chromatic scale.  This
generates a structure that, in principle, remains in place throughout the
composition in question.

Pre-history. Before the modernist age the idea that a musical composition
should establish a fixed order of pitches and intervals and possibly also
of other elements like rhythmic values and dynamic levels  would have
seemed intolerably restrictive and mechanical: and the additional
requirement that a composition maintain that serial ordering throughout,
either through literal repetition or through using any of the possible
transpositions of the chosen series (which thereby changes the pitch
sequence while retaining the interval sequence) would have reinforced those
negative conclusions.  In earlier music such fixed ordering applied only
when motifs or themes were stated and literally repeated: but in earlier
music there was usually more interest in the transformation and development
of themes, and in their interaction with different, contrasting themes,
than in the reiteration of a single musical idea.  This was because music
using the major/minor key system was based on a common practice of
harmonic identities and functions: and this, while distinct from a
compositions thematic material, gave composers a comprehensive set of
musical procedures from which to create a coherent thematic process.

      During the first decade of the twentieth century a small number of
radically-minded composers came to believe that this common practice no
longer provided an adequate basis for music that aimed to do more than
abjectly imitate the achievements of such recent masters as WAGNER and
BRAHMS.  In ARNOLD SCHOENBERGS STRING QUARTET NO. 2, Op. 10 (1908),
aspects of common-practice tonality can be heard alongside music which
either expands or suspends tonality altogether, in a kind of intensively
all-thematic writing that is sometimes called free atonality.  Not only
did diatonic tonality disappear, but the equally longstanding tradition
that harmonic dissonance must always resolve onto consonance was abandoned
in favour of an emancipation of the dissonance, meaning in practice that
consonances need not be used at all.  SCHOENBERGs next work, the THREE
PIANO PIECES, Op. 11 (1909), is entirely within this new style, and for
several subsequent years, in thrall to an essentially expressionist
aesthetic, SCHOENBERG and his most prominent pupils, ALBAN BERG and ANTON
WEBERN, relished this new freedom, which they saw as an appropriately
respectful step forward in the spirit of the remarkable changes that had
taken place in music over the past century and a half, from BACH to
BEETHOVEN and on to WAGNER, BRAHMS, LISZT and MAHLER.

The first phase.  As teacher as well as composer, SCHOENBERG believed that
masterworks were the result of a sophisticated interaction between
inspiration and discipline.  He never advocated an entirely rule-based kind
of atonal or post-tonal composition by numbers: but during the years
between 1909 and 1914, he came to believe that  the lack of any far-
reaching constraints in free atonality was making it difficult to
generate large-scale forms and the coherent musical arguments that must
still underpin those forms.  Between 1914 and the early 1920s it is
possible to trace the emergence of the ordering principle that  because it
came to involve all twelve pitches of the well-tempered chromatic scale 
became known as the twelve-tone method. The materials of a twelve-tone
composition comprised a basic or prime series form, and the eleven
possible transpositions of that series, together with the twelve reversals
or retrogrades of the primes, the twelve inversions of the series (by
interval, so that for example an ascending major third in the prime becomes
a descending major third in the inversion) and the twelve retrogrades of
the inversions, producing a grand total of forty-eight permutations of the
twelve chromatic semitones, all involving the same sequence of intervals.
By the mid-1920s SCHOENBERG was using the twelve-tone technique as the
basis for the kind of substantial instrumental and vocal compositions that
he had found difficult to create under the regime of free atonality.  His
WIND QUINTET, Op. 26  (1923-4) and the one-act opera VON HEUTE AUF MORGEN
(1928-9) show that the new technique was far from incompatible with
traditional compositional genres and musical forms like rondo and sonata,
provided these were seen more in terms of thematic and contrapuntal
processes than of harmonic functions.

Consolidation.  Like Berg and many other SCHOENBERG pupils, ANTON WEBERN
adopted the twelve-tone method during the 1920s, and applied it in works
with such traditional generic titles as symphony, concerto, string quartet
and cantata.  But whereas BERGs twelve-tone works tended to dramatise the
tension that could be sensed between tonal and post-tonal elements  his
VIOLIN CONCERTO (1935) actually incorporates a BACH chorale harmonization
as well as an Austrian folk tune  WEBERN strove to explore twelve-tone
techniques in a more concentrated and systematic manner, which underlined
the musics distance from traditional kinds of harmony.  In fact, any
composer in the 1920s or 1930s using the twelve-tone method for other than
purely monodic music experienced a completely new set of challenges to do
with how far the initial ordering principle could be sustained.

      Pre-compositionally  even if the basic series form was initially
inspired by a melody or a motif - there was the strict ordering of pitch
and interval provided by the abstract presentation of the prime form and
its eleven possible transpositions as set out in the kind of matrix
combining primes, inversions, retrogrades and retrograde inversions that
the more specialised literature on twelve-tone composition employs.  But
the interaction of vertical and horizontal sonorities in actual composition
inevitably involved many adjustments to such abstract linear ordering, and
the challenge became that of preserving the ordered identity of a works
twelve-tone series while allowing smaller segments of it to appear in many
different orderings.  At its best, in such works as SCHOENBERGs STRING
QUARTET no. 4 (1936) and WEBERNs VARIATIONS FOR ORCHESTRA, op. 30 (1940),
twelve-tone technique embodies a satisfying blend of fixity and flexibility
 the ordered and the unordered - which is in no way incompatible with
the comparable ethos of common- practice tonal music.

Expansion. It was exactly this sense of compromise between old and new
which prompted initiatives, most prominent between 1940 and 1960, to
explore the possibility for more systematic, consistent ordering of musical
elements; and because twelve-tone composition had already begun to be
described, in English, as serial, the music of MILTON BABBITT and his
followers in America, and  for a relatively short time  LUIGI NONO,
PIERRE BOULEZ and many other younger progressives in Europe  has often
been regarded as demonstrating total serialism or integral serialism.
The view that SCHOENBERG had failed to perceive the full potential of his
own invention, preferring an essentially neoclassical aesthetic to
something wholeheartedly avant-garde, prompted experiments with ordered
series forms (sometimes of twelve, sometimes fewer elements) for durations,
dynamics and modes of articulation.  BABBITTs COMPOSITION FOR TWELVE
INSTRUMENTS (1948) and Boulezs STRUCTURES 1A for two pianos (1951-2) are
representative of this radical desire to make the kind of new start that
seemed psychologically right after the horrors of the Second World War.
Nevertheless, the post-war emergence of other kinds of musical experiment,
especially those involving chance or aleatory factors, suggested that, for
the listener, there might be little to choose between the complex
mechanisms of serialism and so-called indeterminacy, as in the work of JOHN
CAGE.

      From the 1960s onwards, musical modernism settled into an essentially
pluralistic phase which maintained experimental and avant-garde extremes
either side of a more moderate mainstream.  In this, composers as diverse
as ELLIOTT CARTER, GYRGY LIGETI, HARRISON BIRTWISTLE and WOLFGANG RIHM
worked with the kind of dialogue between ordered and unordered materials in
a post-tonal context that reflected differing degrees of awareness of, and
acceptance of, the twelve-tone and serial initiatives of their progressive
precursors.  Even though post-1960s modernism has not on the whole
preserved the kind of all-embracing serial pitch procedures pioneered by
Schoenberg and Webern, it clearly owes a great deal to those procedures,
and the aesthetic and technical principles they embody.



Further reading

Boulez, Pierre, Conversations with Clestin Delige (London, 1976). Boulez
outlines the evolution of his compositional and aesthetic thinking.

Babbitt, Milton, Words about Music (Madison, 1987).  An absorbing series of
informal lectures which explains the motivation behind attempts to develop
serial principles beyond their basis in Schoenberg and Webern.

Haimo, Ethan, Schoenbergs Serial Odyssey: The Evolution of his Twelve-Tone
Method, 1914-1928. (Oxford, 1990).  An authoritative account of the sources
through which the emergence of the twelve-tone method out of free
atonality can be traced.

Bailey, Kathryn, The Twelve-Note Music of Anton Webern (Cambridge, 1991).
A detailed technical exposition of Weberns procedures in his twelve-tone
compositions.

Pople, Anthony, Berg: Violin Concerto (Cambridge, 1991).  A wide-ranging
exploration of what is probably the best-known twelve-tone composition from
the inter-war years.

Mead, Andrew, An Introduction to the Music of Milton Babbitt (Princeton,
1994).  The most detailed introduction to the compositional processes of
the American pioneer of total serialism.

Grant, M. J., Serial Music, Serial Aesthetics: Compositional Theory in Post-
War Europe (Cambridge, 2001).  An exploration of the historical and
intellectual context within which serial composition emerged in Europe
during the 1950s.

Straus, Joseph N., Stravinskys Late Music (Cambridge, 2001).  Demonstrates
how Stravinsky adoption of serialism after 1950 involved adjustments to
earlier twelve-tone techniques while retaining elements of contact with his
earlier style.

Whittall, Arnold, Introduction to Serialism (Cambridge, 2008).  A
comprehensive technical and historical introduction to the twelve-tone
method and to serialism.

