Taylor & Francis – Encyclopedia of Modernism



About you

[Salutation]

Irene

[Middle name]

Gammel



[Enter your biography]



Ryerson University



Your article

Shakespeare and Company

[Enter any variant forms of your headword – OPTIONAL]

Shakespeare and Company is the legendary English-language lending library and bookstore in Paris, founded in 1919 by Sylvia Beach (1887–1962). The shop opened at 8 rue Dupuytren but later relocated to 12 rue de l’Odéon in 1921, opposite the shop of Beach’s long-time business and personal partner, Adrienne Monnier. Shakespeare and Company operated until Beach was taken prisoner during the German Occupation in 1941; in 1944 Ernest Hemingway participated in liberating the store. Renowned for its famous patrons including Hemingway, Gertrude Stein, Ezra Pound, George Antheil, and James Joyce, both Beach and Shakespeare and Company were champions of Modernism, particularly James Joyce’s controversial novel Ulysses, which Shakespeare and Company published in 1922, after the book had been banned in the United States. The bookstore served as a promotional platform for Ulysses (detailed in her 1956 memoir Shakespeare and Company and in her letters, published posthumously in 2010). Like the expatriate salons of Gertrude Stein and Natalie Barney, Shakespeare and Company is routinely referred to in modernist memoirs, including an idealizing chapter entitled ‘Shakespeare and Company’ in Hemingway’s A Moveable Feast. As Hemingway sums it up: ‘No one that I ever knew was nicer to me’ (35).

Shakespeare and Company is the legendary English-language lending library and bookstore in Paris, founded in 1919 by Sylvia Beach (1887–1962). The shop opened at 8 rue Dupuytren but later relocated to 12 rue de l’Odéon in 1921, opposite the shop of Beach’s long-time business and personal partner, Adrienne Monnier. Shakespeare and Company operated until Beach was taken prisoner during the German Occupation in 1941; in 1944 Ernest Hemingway participated in liberating the store. Renowned for its famous patrons including Hemingway, Gertrude Stein, Ezra Pound, George Antheil, and James Joyce, both Beach and Shakespeare and Company were champions of Modernism, particularly James Joyce’s controversial novel Ulysses, which Shakespeare and Company published in 1922, after the book had been banned in the United States. The bookstore served as a promotional platform for Ulysses (detailed in her 1956 memoir Shakespeare and Company and in her letters, published posthumously in 2010). Like the expatriate salons of Gertrude Stein and Natalie Barney, Shakespeare and Company is routinely referred to in modernist memoirs, including an idealizing chapter entitled ‘Shakespeare and Company’ in Hemingway’s A Moveable Feast. As Hemingway sums it up: ‘No one that I ever knew was nicer to me’ (35).

Further reading:

 (Beach)

(Beach, The Letters of Sylvia Beach)

(Fitch)

(Hemingway)