Shkurupii, Geo (Шкурупій, Ґео) (1903-1937)







Ukrainian futurist poet and prose writer. Shkurupii was a close collaborator of Mykhail' SEMENKO, the founder of Ukrainian futurism, penning articles about Marinetti and the Art of Noises (i.e., music) in 1922. He debuted as a FUTURIST poet (“King of the Futurist Prairies”) that same year with a perplexing collection, Psykhetozy (Psychetosis), distinguished by eroticism, narcissism, neologisms, Dadaist elements and typographic experiments. The poems were ironic, anti-aesthetic, focused on urban themes, speed, and machines. Opposed to the SYMBOLIST cult of the Poet, Shkurupii’s later poems were topical, narrative and rhetorical in form; he blasted conservatism and philistinism, while showing enthusiasm for the new Soviet revolutionary order. In 1923 he also embraced prose. Determined to develop a mass readership, Shkurupii focused on plotting, defamiliarization, mystification and canonical popular genres like the detective story. His acute FORMALISM sometimes turned to self-conscious, meta-artistic practices, characterized by commentary on literary conventions that he set out to undermine in his writings. His most controversial novel was Dveri v den' [Gateway into Day, 1929], a mélange of literary and documentary forms for which Soviet literary critics condemned him. In 1930 he edited two issues of the futurist Avanhard-Al'manakh proletars'kykh myttsiv Novoi generatsii (Avant-Garde: Almanac of the Proletarian Artists of the New Generation). Shkurupii was executed during the Stalinist terror in 1937.



References and Further Reading:

Ilnytzkyj, Oleh S. (1997). Ukrainian Futurism: A Historical and Critical Study. Cambridge/MA: Harvard University Press; Ukrainian Research Institute.

Mudrak, Myroslava M. (1986). The New Generation and Artistic Modernism in the Ukraine.  Ann Arbor: UMI Research Press.



Major works:

Psykhetozy. Vitryna tretia [Psychetosis. Display Window Three]. Kyiv: Panfuturysty, 1922. 

Baraban. Vitryna druha [Drum. Display Window Three]. Kyiv: Panfuturysty, 1923.

Peremozhets' drakona. [Vanquisher of the Dragon] Kharkiv: DVU, 1925.

Pryhody mashynista Khorna. [The Adventures of Engineer Khorn] Kharkiv: Knyhospilka, 1925.

Zharyny sliv. Vybrani poeziï. [Embers of Words. Selected Poetry] Kharkiv: Knyhospilka, 1925.

Dlia druziv poetiv suchasnykiv vichnosty. [For my Poet-Friends, Contemporaries of Eternity] Kyiv: DVU, 1929.

Dveri v den'. [Gateway into Day] Kharkiv: Proletarii, 1929.

Strashna myt'. Opovidannia. [Terrible Moment. Short Stories] Kharkiv: Knyhospilka, 1929.



Essays and Criticism:

Shkurupii, Geo. “Manifest Marinetti i panfuturyzm.” Semafor u Maibutnie. Aparat Panfuturystiv 1 (May 1922): 8–10.

Shkurupii, Geo. “Muzyka shumiv (Musique bruitiste).” Semafor u Maibutnie. Aparat Panfuturystiv 1 (May 1922): 23.





Oleh S. Ilnytzkyj, University of Alberta





Source url for image: 

http://uk.wikipedia.org/wiki/Файл:Geo_Shkurupiy.jpg