
Author: Jessica Stephenson

Skotnes, Cecil
Cecil Edwin Frans Skotnes (b.1926, East London, Eastern Cape, South
Africa. D. 2009, Cape Town, South Africa)

Cecil Skotnes, a print-maker, woodcarver and educator, played a lead role
in the mid to late twentieth century South African art world. Together with
other young artists of the 1960s, Skotnes forged an art style with a
distinctive regional identity as well as ties to international modernism,
and he was a founding member of the non-racial Amandlozi Group; yet, it is
his role as art teacher and advocate at the Polly Street Art Centre in
Johannesburg from 1952 until 1966 that isof paramount significance.
Through his efforts a generation of black urban artists were trained and
wereafforded a network and patronage neededto pursue professional
careers. At the time the Polly Street art centre was one of the only
institutions that offered black South Africans access to education in
modern art media such as painting, graphics and sculpture. Skotnes
successful promotion of young artists in the 1950s and 1960s made Polly
Street a model for other community centers that arose in the 1970s and
1980s, and many of its graduates went on to found or direct community
projects such as Community Arts Project in Cape Town, and Funda in
Johannesburg. Skotnes was effective in establishing a support network
amongst black students and white artists, commercial enterprises, the
church and commercial galleries, which aided in launching the careers of a
number of students, most notably Sydney Kumalo, Louis Maqhubela, Durant
Sihlali and Ephraim Ngatane. He also assisted many young artists through
informal mentoring including Lucy Sibiya, David Brown and Willie Bester.

Cecil Skotnespersonal art style andas well as hisapproach to pedagogy
were shaped by his art education in Europe and South Africa.After
completing military service in Europe during WWII, Skotnes studied drawing
in FlorenceunderHeinrich Steiner. Returning to South Africa, he
completed a fine art degree at the University of the Witwatersrand in 1950
underHeather Martienssen, Douglas Portway and Charles Argent.Duringthis
time Skotnes was exposed to traditional West and Central African sculpture.
On a return trip to Europe in 1951, Skotnes experienced first hand the work
of Pablo Picasso, Henry Moore and other modernists working in a primitivist
mode and found them of particular interest. Skotnescame to favor the
woodcut printearly on,in part through his friendship with African art
dealer Egon Guenther who ran a printing press. Sktones experimented with
the woodcut medium initially through his use of a large scale format and
then, in the early 1960s, he began to explore the possibilities presented
by the wood blocks themselves as art works. He engraved, colored and
textured them, as seen in Two Figures. Skotnes arrived at a form of
primitivism that was in part based in his use of wood and carving,
referencing both African sculpture and the print technique of German
Expressionism, as well as in his content, which focused on the
stylizedhuman form modeled after African sculpture.

Skotnes acquainted his Polly Street art students with traditional West and
Central African art as well as certain forms of European primitivism.
However, with the exception of Syndey Kumalo, few Polly Street artists drew
from the sources favoured by Skotnes because it was believed that to do so
would advocate apartheid policies; elements of tradition and tribalism
were rejected by most Polly Street students because they were considered
part of the governments apartheid strategy of divide and rule.Instead,
most Polly Street graduates used the technicaltraining received from
Skotnes in watercolor, printmaking and oil painting to work in a social
realist manner to portray scenes of township life. There were also
practical, financial reasons why Polly Street artists favoured working in
these media. Creating works on paper in charcoals and watercolors is both
inexpensive and easy to transport.

After the Polly Street art centreer closed, Skotnes taught at the Nyanga
Art Center and Community Art Project in the Cape during the 1970s and
1980s. Having established planar wood carving as his focus in the 1960s,
Skotnes led an active art career through public commissions and an
impressive exhibition schedule, both locally at venues such as Goodman
Gallery, and abroad. He received numerous awards, several honorary degrees,
and his work is extensively represented in collections includingAnglo
American Corporation New York, USA;Caterpillar Tractor, USA; Johannesburg
Art Gallery; Johannesburg Municipal Library; Kettering Gallery, UK;
Rembrandt Art Foundation, Stellenbosch; Royal Belgian Library, Brussels,
Belgium; Royal Museum of Fine Arts, Copenhagen, Denmark; Sasol; Schlesinger
Organisation, London, UK; South African National Gallery, Cape Town;
Stuyvesant Foundation, Amsterdam, Holland; and Van Leer Collection,
Amsterdam, Holland among others.

References and Further Reading:
Frieda Harmsen (ed.) (1996).Cecil Skotnes, Pretoria: South African
Breweries

Elza Miles. (2004). Polly Street: The Story of an Art Centre, Johannesburg:
Ampersand Foundation.

Image Caption:
Two figures. Carved, incised and painted wood panel

[pic]
http://www.johansborman.co.za/sa-masters/skotnes-
cecil/two_figures_61_x_51_cm.jpg/
