
Skupina vtvarnch umlc (The Group of Fine Artists)

Skupina vtvarnch umlc (The Group of Fine Artists) was an avant-garde
artist group active in Prague in the years 1911-1917. Skupina consisted of
Czech painters, sculptors, architects, designers, illustrators, art
historians and art critics. Many of Skupinas members seceded from the
Mnes Union, Pragues dominant association for modern art, to form the new
group. The foundational meeting in May 1911 was attended by Emil Filla,
Josef Gor, Otto Gutfreund, Pavel Jank, Vlastislav Hofman, Frantiek
Kysela, Zdenk Kratochvl, Ladislav ma, and Vclav pla. These founders
were joined by Vratislav Brunner, Josef Chochol, Vilm Dvok, Frantiek
Langer, Jan Thon, Vincenc Bene, Josef apek and his art critic brother
Karl apek, with the later additions of Antonn Prochzka and art
historians Vincenc Kram and V. V. tech. Predecessors to the group can be
found in the inclusiveness and expressive aims of Osma (The Eight; 1907-
1908), some of whose former members joined Skupina, and in the spiritual
orientation of a Czech fin-de-sicle art that had absorbed the ethos of
vernacular Gothic and Baroque.

Skupina helped launch a Czech variant of Cubism in the fine and applied
arts. The groups implicit aim was to transform urban life through modern
art and design, an ideal that recalls the English Arts & Crafts Movement
and foreshadows the Bauhaus in Germany. This metamorphosis, however, was
dependent upon Czech responses to Parisian Cubism. A pivotal role was
played by the art historian Vincenc Kram who opened to Prague artists his
private collection of works by Old Masters and modernists including Pablo
Picasso and Georges Braque, the latter portion amassed between 1910 and
1914. Kram even facilitated direct contact between Czech artists and
Picasso in Paris. Skupina members also maintained connections to Germany,
exhibiting with the Neue Secession in Berlin in 1911, the Sonderbund in
Cologne in 1912, and in 1913 at Munichs Galerie Neue Kunst and Herwarth
Waldens Der Sturm in Berlin. Czech Cubism passed through stages of
development which contributed to a split within Skupina. In its early
manifestation Czech Cubism closely emulated Parisian Cubism, with most
Skupina members following Picasso, Braque, and Juan Gris while some Mnes
members followed the these artists as well as Salon Cubists around Albert
Gleizes and Jean Metzinger. This emulation of Parisian Cubism then merged
with subjects specific to the Czech context. Internal division within
Skupina erupted in November/December, 1912, over the question of how
closely to follow Picassos example, with Filla advocating absolute
emulation and others demanding more flexible interpretation. As a result,
group members Brunner, the apek brothers, Hofman, Chochol, ma, and pla
left Skupina and rejoin Mnes.

Alongside group exhibitions Skupina sought additional ways reach a broad
audience. Their journal Umleck Msnk (Arts Monthly) was founded in
October 1911. First edited by Josef apek, then by Pavel Jank and
Frantiek Langer after April 1912, it published essays by Skupina members
and progressive-minded cultural commentators. Offerings included exhibition
reviews, publication reviews, theoretical essays, and opinion pieces, most
of which were richly illustrated. The journal sold advertising spots to
local businesses and reader subscriptions to fund publication. Architects
and designers of Skupina also participated in organizations that advocated
for quality in the applied arts. Both the Czech applied art cooperative
Artl, founded in 1908 and modeled on the Wiener Werksttte, and the
Prask umleck dlny (P.U.D., or Prague Art Workshops), founded in 1912
by Skupina members Gor, Chochol, and Jank with Odolen Grgr, served
avant-garde designers and progressive consumers as an outlet for the design
and production of modern furniture and applied arts.

The Great War interrupted the exhibition activities of Skupina and their
journal Umleck Msnk ceased publication. The group slowly dissolved as
members took individual paths. Filla immigrated to the Netherlands to join
the resistance; Gutfreund volunteered as a medic in the Austro-Hungarian
military and was taken as POW; some former Skupina members rejoined Mnes;
and many continued their practice independently in the Czech lands. The
legacy of Skupina can be seen in the artists and designers mature styles
in the late 1910s and 1920s, in Rondo-Cubist architecture of the 1920s, and
in the art of Devtsil pursuing Czech Surrealist Poeticism in 1920s-30s
Prague.

Skupina exhibitions:

     1st exhibition held January 5  March 1, 1912, in Pragues Obecn dm
      (Municipal House) with works by Josef Gor, Vlastislav Hofman, Josef
      Chochol, Pvel Jank, Josef Rosipal, Otto Gutfreund, Vratislav
      Brunner, Ladislav ma, Vclav pla, Frantiek Kysela, Josef apek,
      Vincenc Bene, Zdenk Kratochvl, Emil Filla, and Antonn Prochzka.
     2nd exhibition held September 28  end of November, 1912, in Pragues
      Obecn dm with works by Skupina and former Osma artists Bene, apek,
      Feigl, Filla, Gor, Gutfreund, Hofman, Chochol, Jank, Kratochvl,
      Nowak, Prochzka, ma and pla; the Fauve artists Andr Derain and
      Othon Friesz; and Brcke artists Erich Heckel, Ernst Ludwig Kirchner,
      Otto Mueller, and Karl Schmidt-Rottluff.
     3rd exhibition held April 5  April16, 1913, at the Galerie Neue Kunst
      in Munich, featuring Bene, Filla, Gutfreund, Prochzka, Gor, and
      Jank.
     4th exhibition held May  June, 1913, in Pragues Obecn Dm included
      Skupina artists and international guests Derain, Georges Braque, Pablo
      Picasso, Juan Gris, and Ardengo Soffici, plus a section of art from
      East Asia and Africa and over a hundred works of folk art.
     5th exhibition held September 20  November 1, 1913, at Herwarth
      Waldens Galerie Der Sturm in Berlin, featuring Bene, Filla, Gor,
      Gutfreund, Jank, Prochzka, and Otokar Kubn.
     6th exhibition held February  March, 1914, in Pragues Obecn Dm
      featuring Bene, Filla, Gor, Gutfreund, Jank, Kratochvl, Otakar
      Nejedl, Prochzka, Braque, Derain, Munch, Pechstein, Picasso, and
      five African sculptures. Simultaneous with Skupinas 6th exhibition,
      the Mnes Union staged the counter-exhibition Modern Art (February 
      March, 1914) organized by Andr Mercereau and including Czech artists
      Josef apek, Hofman, Chochol, Kubn, Kubita, ma, pla and
      international artists Alexander Archipenko, Constantin Brancusi,
      Robert Delaunay, Raymond Duchamp-Villon, Raoul Dufy, Othon Friesz,
      Albert Gleizes, Roger de la Fresnaye, Louis Marcoussis, Jean Marchand,
      Jean Metzinger, Piet Mondrian, Diego Rivera, and Jacques Villon.


Key Bibliographic Sources

Benson, Timothy O. and va Forgcs, eds. Between Worlds: A Sourcebook of
Central European Avant-Gardes, 1910-1930 (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press,
2002).

Lahoda, Vojtch.  esk Kubismus (Prague: Brana, 1996).

Lama, Miroslav. Osma a Skupina (Prague: Odeon, 1988).

Mansbach, Steven A. Modern Art in Eastern Europe: From the Baltic to the
Balkans, ca. 1890-1939 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999).

Padrta, Ji with Miroslav Lama. Osma a Skupina vtvarnch umlc  1907-
1917: Teorie, Kritika, Polemika (Prague: Odeon, 1992).

vcha, Rostislav, ed. The Pyramid, the Prism and the Arc: Czech Cubist
Architecture 1911-1923 (Prague: Gallery, 2000).

vestka, Ji and Tom Vlek, with Pavel Lika, eds. Czech Cubism 1909-
1925: Art, Architecture, Design (translation of 1991 original). (Prague: i3
CZ Modernista, 2006).

Uhrov, Olga and Vojtch Lahoda, eds.  Vincenc Kram. From Old Masters to
Picasso, exh. cat. (Prague: National Gallery, 2000).

von Vegesack, Alexander, ed. Czech Cubism: Architecture, Furniture,
Decorative Arts, 1910-1925 (Weil am Rhein 1991 and New York 1998).


Relevant Websites

Obecn Dm (Municipal House) in Prague
http://www.obecnidum.cz/web/en/guide-to-the-municipal-house- (site of
Skupina exhibitions)

National Gallery in Prague, Collection of 19th and 20th-century art
http://www.ngprague.cz/en/5/sekce/veletrzni-palace/ (significant number of
works by Skupina artists)

Museum of Czech Cubism, House at the Black Madonna, Prague
http://www.ngprague.cz/en/9/sekce/house-at-the-black-madonna/ (Cubist
architecture; now exhibits works by Czech Cubists on a rotating basis)

Umleckoprmyslov museum v Praze (Museum of Decorative Arts in Prague)
http://www.upm.cz/?language=en (significant collection of Czech Cubist
furniture, book design, and applied arts)


Suggested images

[pic] Emil Filla, Painter. Oil and sand on canvas, 98 x 90 cm. Vincenc
Kram collection. Image source: http://www.jirisvestka.com/vincenc-kramar

[pic] Otto Gutfreund, Anxiety, 1911 (exhibited at Skupinas first
exhibition in 1912). Muzeum Umn Olomouc. Image source:
http://art.jib.cz/vuk/fotogalerie/muo/sbirky/muo9/view

[pic] Josef Chochol, Apartment Building, 1913-14 at Neklanova ulice 98, in
Vyehrad, Prague. Image source:
http://housingprototypes.org/project?File_No=CZ007

[pic] Josef Gor, P.U. D., Writing Desk, 1914. photo: Ondej Kocourek for
UPM. Image source:
http://www.upm.cz/index.php?page=123&year=stable&id=152&language=en


[pic]  Vincenc Kram with his collection of French Cubism
Image source: http://www.jirisvestka.com/vincenc-kramar
