
Irena Vladimirsky
Socialist Realism in Russia
Socialist Realism was a term used to  characterise  the  state  of  art  and
literature in  the  USSR  during  the  1930s-1950s.  Socialist  Realism  was
defined as a fundamental method of socialist art, literature  and  criticism
that  demanded  from  artists  a   truthful   and   a   historically   real
representation of socialist reality in its development. Truthfulness and  a
historical reality of socialist life as reflected in  art  was  intended  to
help in educating of Soviet citizens in  the  spirit  of  the  revolutionary
socialist-Marxist ideology.
The official definition of Socialist  Realism  was  accepted  by  the  First
Congress of the  Soviet  Writers  in  1934.  First  steps  towards  the  new
socialist art were undertaken during the 1920s  with  the  establishment  of
the  Association  of  Revolutionary  painters  and  VKhUTEMAS  (Higher  Art-
Technical Workshop). New Art associations required that their  members  show
everyday life of  ordinary  citizens  of  the  new  social  order:  workers,
peasants, Red Army men, party and Soviet leaders  and  Bolshevik  revolution
heroes.
Since 1934, Socialist Realism was defined as the only form of  art  creation
and became the official guideline  for  art  and  literature  and  the  sole
criteria by  which  the  validity  of  any  literary  or  art  creation  was
appreciated. From then on,  art  and  literature  were  regarded  solely  as
instruments of Communist propaganda. They were intended to  reflect,  or  to
describe, the brighter sides of life under Communism. Socialist Realism  was
accepted as the only officially accepted form and non-socialist realist  art
and literary  works  were  rejected  by  Communists  as  the  expression  of
bourgeois decadence.

Socialist Realism was based on three main principles. First was  a  national
character  that  was  intended  to  make  art  understandable  to   ordinary
citizens, such as workers and  peasants.  The  second  was  to  connect  art
images to proper ideological content. Artists  were  expected  to  show  the
peaceful  everyday  life  of  Soviet  citizens,  heroic  deeds  of  workers,
peasants, and soldiers involved in the construction of a  new  and  improved
society for humanity. The third principle was the  principle  of  actuality.
Artists were required to be objective  in  their  descriptions  of  everyday
reality in its historical  development,  following  the  requirements  of  a
materialistic understanding of history and class struggle of working  people
for a better life. According to Marxist  postulates,  changes  of  existence
determine changes in consciousness and the vision of existing reality.
Realism was defined as the basic method of socialist art. Socialist  realism
was expected to use the heritage of world realistic art, connect  art  works
with everyday reality and make art a mirror of socialist  transformation  of
society. Every artist  was  required  to  demonstrate  an  understanding  of
socialist reconstruction processes  in  their  dialectical  development  and
interaction.  The  main  emphasize  was  placed  on  positive  heroes,  true
builders of a better society and Communist paradise on earth.
The Communist Party and the Soviet State limited art  to  narrow  frames  of
strictly defined  rules  and  restrictions  and  implemented  administrative
sanctions against unwilling tendencies in art, literature and  architecture.
Distinguished artists were encouraged by creative  commissions  provided  by
the All Union Houses of Art Work at  the  outskirts  of  Moscow  or  on  the
shores of the Black Sea. Party and Soviet  authorities  took  responsibility
for  organization  of  art  exhibitions  and   provided   necessary   living
conditions for the Soviet artists. Freedom of art  creativity  was  confined
to technical methods of painting and choice of  the  color   palette.  Party
and Soviet organizations became the  main  customers  of  Socialist  Realism
paintings and sculptures. Works  of  Socialist  Realism  were  mandatory  in
every public place, party and administrative building, school,  kindergarten
and hospital.
Isaac Brodsky (1883-1939), a student  of  Ilya  Repin  should  be  mentioned
among outstanding representatives of Socialist Realism.  He  was  known  for
his gallery of portrayals of  Soviet  and  party  leaders,  mostly  Vladimir
Lenin and paintings dedicated to the events of the Bolshevik Revolution  and
the Russian Civil War. Alexander Samokhvalov (1894-1971) was famous for  his
universal art craft. He was known for his paintings, watercolors,  graphics,
illustrations, sculptures and teaching.  His  favorite  subject  was  Soviet
youth. Alexander Deineka (1899-1969) was a  painter,  graphic  designer  and
sculptot. His paintings depict scenes of sports and labor  events.  His  set
of mosaics became the decoration of  Maykovskaya  Metro  Station  in  Moscow
which was opened in 1938.  Pavel Korin (1892-1967) was born  to  the  family
of an icon-painter,  was  a  student  of  Mikhail  Nesterov  and  Konstantin
Korovin and was known for his monumental paintings  (Alexander  Nevsky)  and
restoration work. Dmitry Nalbandyan (1906-1993) was given  the  nickname  of
"the first  paint  brush"  of  the  Communist  leadership,  mostly  for  his
portraits of Josef Stalin and his close surroundings.
Socialist Realism became a fundamental art principle  in  the  countries  of
Eastern Europe (Romania,  Bulgaria,  German  Democratic  Republic,  Hungary,
Poland) and Far  East  (China,  Vietnam,  North  Korea).  Socialist  Realism
became a substitute for existing reality. In the place of true  reality  the
artists offered a myth  of  an  imaginable  reality  as  envisioned  by  the
Communist dream.

References and further reading
Bown, M. (1991). Art under Stalin. New York: Holmes & Meier Publishers
Bown, M. & Lanfranconi, M.(2012). Socialist Realism: Great  Soviet  Painting
1920-1970. Milano: Skira
Clark, K. (2011). Moscow, the Fourth Rome: Stalinism,  Cosmopolitanism,  and
the Evolution of Soviet Culture. Cambridge: Harvard University Press
Gorky, M. & Radek, K.(1977). Soviet Writers' Congress, 1934: The  Debate  on
Socialist Realism and Modernism. London: Lawrence & Wishart
Grays, B., Rougle, C. (2011).  The  Total  Art  of  Stalinism:  Avant-Garde,
Aesthetic Dictatorship, and Beyond. New York: Verso
James, C.,  Vaughan,  J.  (1973).  Soviet  Socialist  Realism:  Origins  and
Theory. London: St. Martin's Press
Paperno, I., Grossman, J. D. (1994). Creating Life. The Aesthetic Utopia  of
Russian Modernism. Stanford: Stanford University Press
Prokhanov, G. (1995). Art Under Socialist  Realism:  Soviet  Painting  1930-
1950. New York: Craftsman House
Terz, A. (1982). The  Trial  Begins  and  On  Socialist  Realism.  Berkeley:
University of California Press

[pic]
Alexander Deineka,Relay Race along the Garden Ring, 1947.  Oil  on  canvas.
199 x 299 cm.State Tretyakov Gallery, Moscow
http://www.artpoisk.info/artist/deyneka_aleksandr_aleksandrovich_1899/estaf
eta_po_kol_cu_b

[pic]
Isaak Brodsky, Vladimir Lenin in Smolny, 1930. Oil on canvas. 190 x 287  cm.
State Tretyakov Gallery, Moscow
http://www.tretyakovgallery.ru/en/collection/_show/image/_id/331

[pic]
Pavel Korin, Alexander Nevsky, 1951. Oil on canvas. 101  x  72,5  cm.  State
Tretyakov Gallery, Moscow
http://www.tretyakovgallery.ru/en/collection/_show/image/_id/343

[pic]
Alexander Samokhvalov, Girl with Shot, 1933. Oil on  canvas.  124,5  x  65,8
cm. State Tretyakov Gallery, Moscow
http://www.tretyakovgallery.ru/en/collection/_show/image/_id/359

[pic]
Mitrofan Grekov, Gun  Cart,  1925.  Oil  on  canvas.  83  x  114  sm.  State
Tretyakov Gallery, Moscow
http://www.tretyakovgallery.ru/en/collection/_show/image/_id/334

