
Soganoya Gor (1877-1948)
Japanese actor, director and playwright. Creator of a new genre of modern
comedy kigeki (also, shinkigeki). He wrote around 1,000 short comedies
under the pen name, Ikkai Gyojin. His comedy style was inspired by
humoristic as well as satirical and ironical laughter in Western style
comedy such as Moliere. Many of his works are currently played by the
comedy troupe, Shchiku Shinkigeki. His signature pieces include: The
Flower of the Luffa (1917) and Cherry Trees in Leaf (1933)
Soganoya became a student of kabuki actor Nakamura Sangor in 1892 and made
a stage debut as utility actor Nakamura Sannosuke at Osakas Naniwaza in
1893. In 1902, he met Nakamura Tokizos student, Nakamura Jidai (1869-1925)
at the traveling kabuki troupe Osakas Fukuiza. In 1903, using their new
names, Sannosuke as Gor and Jidai as Jr, they formed Soganoya Brothers
Troupe in order to create new comedy replacing the old style of comedy
called niwaka established by Tsuruya Danjur in Osaka. Their debut in 1904
at Yokaza in Itami near Osaka was failure, but made a first success with
Funny Kanjinch acted for the travelling kabuki troupe, Nakamura Fukuen
Ichiza in Wakayama, in which Gor acted the role of Benkei and Jr
Togashi. Producer Toyoshima Torakichi labeled their play as reformed
comedy and produced the same work at Osaka Dtonboris Naniwaza using the
name of Soganoya for the first time. The following production Anonymous
Extra (1904) dealing with the Japan-Russo War created the comedy boom,
which helped produce many comedy troupes in Osaka. Their style, similar to
the old style, niwaka, has an aspect of parodies of kabuki. At the same
time, it has a realistic acting style and modern sensitivity dealing with
current topics. Shchiku invited Soganoya Brothers Ichiza to Kyoto for the
1904 opening of Kyoto Asahiza.
In 1905, Soganoya made his first Tokyo debut at Shintomiza. The production
was not very successful because the audience in Tokyo was unfamiliar with
his Osaka dialect. In 1906, after making improvement, he made a success at
Meijiza in Tokyo. The production included the short comedy, titled Unhappy
and labeled as French comedy, treating a jealous wife and a henpecked
husband similar to a kygen play Hanako. After 1910, Shintomiza became
Soganoyas base where the troupe reached its prime time. By mid 1910s,
Soganoya had become estranged from his partner Jr, whose acting style was
amusing and nonsensical
In 1914, Soganoya travelled and saw plays at theatres in Russia, Germany,
Norway, Holland and England. In London he had seen Victorian melodrama,
variety and vaudeville shows for three months. In the first production
after the trip, Sogonoya used an actress for the first time in a social
drama Style 16 Clock (1915), which was praised highly by socialist Kaizuka
Shiburoku as a play for the people. Soganoya renamed his troupe as The
Peoples Theatre Wada Kyuichi Ichiza using his real name, in which all
actors were listed in the production pamphlet using their real names. His
only production staged at Osaka Nakaza was a failure as the experiment was
regarded as arrogant by both the producers and the audience. In the same
year, after returning his troupes name to Soganoya Gor Ichiza, Soganoya
regained his popularity. After the Kant Great Earthquake, when Shchikus
Shinbashi Enbuj Theatre was newly opened in 1926, Soganoya moved his base
to Tokyo and played three to four times a year at Shinbashi Enbuj until
1944. After he lost voice because of an operation for throat cancer in
1948, he acted on the stage pantomiming in Osaka. Shchiku Shinkigeki was
formed two months after his death.
YOSHIKO FUKUSHIMA

