SOLANAS, Fernando (February 16, 1936—)



Fernando “Pino” Solanas is an Argentine director, screenwriter, author, politician, and public intellectual. Alongside Octavio Getino, Solanas is a founder of the Third Cinema political film movement, which would serve to express the political challenges of Latin American cinema and contribute to transforming filmmaking practice. His most important film, La hora de los hornos (Hour of the Furnaces, 1968) is a forceful critique of neocolonialism, violence, and underdevelopment. The film would yield the manifesto, “Towards a Third Cinema” co-authored by Solanas and Getino in 1969. Third Cinema, for Solanas and Getino, is a radical film practice that opposes first cinema (Hollywood cinema) and rejects second cinema (auteur, European art cinema) in favour of articulating a political cinema attendant to the problems of the world’s underclasses, committed to the decolonization of the developing world. A dedicated activist and political persona, Solanas continues to make films and inroads in Argentine politics. Other notable works include Memorias del saqueo (Social Genocide, 2004), a documentary about political corruption, economic privatization and widespread hunger in Argentina, as well as Dignidad de los nadies (Dignity of the Nobodies, 2005), a film about the existential challenges facing Argentine people after the economic crisis of 2001. Solanas was elected to the Argentine Senate as a representative of the progressive party Proyecto Sur. Actively writing, producing, and directing films in search of the film-essay form, Solanas’ most recent feature documentary is titled La guerra del fracking (2013), a film about the environmental costs, health risks, and economic unsustainability of hydraulic fracking in contemporary Argentina.



Further reading:


Solanas, F. and O. Getino (1969) “Towards a Third Cinema,” in Michael T. Martin, ed., The New Latin American Cinema: Theory, Practices and Transcontinental Articulations, Volume 1. Detroit: Wayne State University Press, 33-58, 1997.



Solanas F. and J. MacBean (1970) “Fernando Solanas: An Interview,” Film Quarterly, Vol. 24, No. 1, 37-43.

Solanas, F. and O. Getino (1973) Cine, cultura y decolonización, Buenos Aires: Siglo XXI.



Armes, R. (1987) Third World Filmmaking in the West, Berkeley: University of California Press.

Stam, R. (1990) “The Hour of the Furnaces and the Two Avant-Gardes.” in Julianne Burton, ed., The Social Documentary in Latin America. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.

List of works:

La hora de los hornos (1968, co-directed with Octavio Getino)

Perón: la revolución justicialista (1971, co-directed with Octavio Getino)

Perón: Actualización política y doctrinaria para tomar el poder (1971, co-directed with Octavio Getino)

Sur (1988)

Memoria del saqueo (2004)

La dignidad de los nadies (2005)

La próxima estación (2008)

La guerra del fracking (2013)

Paratextual material:



La guerra del fracking (2013) [complete film]

http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YA6Xp1WDQq4



Official website of Fernando “Pino” Solanas

http://www.pinosolanas.com/



Interview with Fernando Solanas by Cuban director Julio García Espinosa
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XrryhqvZIh0



Photograph of Solanas’ Proyecto Sur campaign

http://juventudinformada.com.ar/wp-content/uploads/pino.jpg

Jorge E. Cuéllar

Yale University