
Silvio Plotquin
Universidad Torcuato Di Tella

Solsona, Justo Jos (1931 -)
[pic]
Justo Solsona
http://www.clarin.com/capital_federal/Justo-Solsona-Buenos-Aires-
personas_0_525547599.html

The onset of activity of the Argentinean  architect  (University  of  Buenos
Aires, 1957) matches with the  process  of  political  reorganization  which
followed the fall of the  government  of  Juan  Domingo  Pern  (1955).  The
agenda, in that span, engaged architecture and design in a bet  to  eloquent
modernization, metropolitan culture and upgraded technology. In this  frame,
a dozen works placed Solsona in the kernel of  architectural  production  in
Argentina.

The proposed 300 housing complex in La Boca, south of  the  city  of  Buenos
Aires, winner of  the  contest  sponsored  by  the  National  Mortgage  Bank
(1957), and designed in partnership  with  architects  Ernesto  Katzenstein,
Gianni Peani and Josefa Santos, was a high density original fresh answer  in
reinforced concrete to cultural-traditional ways of dwelling.
A winning second  prize  in  the  contest  for  the  National  Library(1961)
proposed a sculptural metal roof of metabolists  abstract  shapes  unfolding
innovative relationships between the main reading rooms and the lawns of  an
existing state garden where it would have  to  be  located.  Precisely,  the
entry to this competition  in  collaboration  with  Flora  Manteola,  Javier
Snchez Gmez and Josefa Santos (and  later, Carlos Sallaberry) gave led  to
the consolidation of the architectural studio MSGSSS, the firm in  which  he
developed his career ever since.

In 1968, the project for the head offices of  the  Ciudad  de  Buenos  Aires
Bank  took  advantage  of  an  existing  old  department  store  from  early
twentieth  century  to  display  a  new  concept  of   visually   continuous
commercial banking space by means of lighting and transparent  tinted  glass
block enclosures, in a way, somehow after the Glass House by Pierre  Chareau
and Bernard  Bijvoet  (1928-31).  The  same  year,  the  projected  31-story
building for the Industrial Union of Argentina (UIA)  poses  a  solution  of
formal and structural setting with profusion  of  technological  details  of
perfect  execution,  attuned  to  the   requirements   of   uniqueness   and
representation that argentinean culture -and the real  estate-  assigned  to
skyscrapers.

The complexes Rioja and  Acoyte,  financed  by  the  city  of  Buenos  Aires
(1968), provided 440 y 410 housing  facilites  respectively,  complying  the
Team X  paradigms:  high  density,  socialization  and  identity.  The  Luis
Piedrabuena housing (1974) with 2100
dwellings, south of the city, seemed also commited  with  the  proposals  of
the contemporary  brittish,  belgian  and  dutch  avant-garde.  The  Mendoza
Stadium  and   the   broadcasting   Argentina   Televisora   Color   (1976),
commissioned among the 1978 Soccer
World Cup public works, are two highly sophisticated projects in  monumental
and picturesque string, which blurred the  borderlines  between  nature  and
architecture.

Early  devoted  to  college  teaching,  Solsona  stayed  away   from   state
university during the last military dictatorship in 1976  while  founded  La
Escuelita de Buenos Aires (19761983),  along  with  Rafael  Violy,  Ernesto
Katzenstein, and Antonio Diaz,  consistent  with  the  experiences  of  IAUS
(Insitute  for  Architecture  and  Urban  Studies)  of  New  York.   Solsona
displayed  since,  the  particular  focus  in  typological  integration  and
innovation of high density metropolitan  schemes,  which  characterized  and
outlined his architectural practice, shown in the Prourban (1979-83).
                                    [pic]
National Library Competition Second winning prize, 1961
Copyright: MSGSSS archives

[pic]
La Rioja Housing, 1968
Copyright: MSGSSS Archives

                                    [pic]

Ciudad de Buenos Aires Bank, 1968
Copyright: Yukio Futugawa, GA Global Architecture Documents N10 1984
