Taylor & Francis – Encyclopedia of Modernism



About you

[Salutation]

Kerry

[Middle name]

Nguyen-Long



[Enter your biography]



[Enter the institution with which you are affiliated]



Your article

Son, Nam

Nguyen Van Tho; Nguyễn Vạn Thọ

Nam Son was co-founder of the L’Ecole des Beaux-Arts de l’Indochine (EBAI), which opened its doors in Hanoi in 1925. As a talented artist his work drew on Vietnamese, Chinese, and French influences. Born into a scholarly family his traditional education was followed by secondary education at a French colonial school which secured his employment in the colonial administrative system, while he simultaneously worked as an illustrator for several local magazines. He long aspired to establish a fine arts school in Hanoi and an encounter with Frenchman Victor Tardieu (1870-1937), in Hanoi in 1923, afforded Nam Son opportunity to share this aspiration; in fact, Nam Son had already drawn up tentative plans for such a venture.

Nam Son was co-founder of the L’Ecole des Beaux-Arts de l’Indochine (EBAI), which opened its doors in Hanoi in 1925. As a talented artist his work drew on Vietnamese, Chinese, and French influences. Born into a scholarly family his traditional education was followed by secondary education at a French colonial school which secured his employment in the colonial administrative system, while he simultaneously worked as an illustrator for several local magazines. He long aspired to establish a fine arts school in Hanoi and an encounter with Frenchman Victor Tardieu (1870-1937), in Hanoi in 1923, afforded Nam Son opportunity to share this aspiration; in fact, Nam Son had already drawn up tentative plans for such a venture. Tardieu, a recipient of the Prix d’ Indochine, presented a proposal to Governor-General Henri Merlin which was subsequently approved. Early 1925 Nam Son accompanied Tardieu to Paris to recruit teachers and buy materials. While there he studied at the workshops of Jean-Pierre Laurens (1875-1932) and Felix Aubert (1866-1940) and encountered young Japanese and Chinese artists similarly exploring the European arts scene, among them Xu Beihong (1895-1953) with whom he established a life-long friendship.

Further reading:

(de Menonville)

(Ngoc and Viet)

(Nguyen-Long)