
Stein, Gertrude (1874-1946)


Gertrude Stein was a modernist writer of the twentieth century notable for
the extremity of her stylistic innovations. During the first half of her
career, her radical experimentation made her a target of mockery. In 1933,
she published The Autobiography of Alice B. Toklas, a memoir of modernist
activity in Paris written in a more accessible style. Intellectually
serious but amusing and filled with gossip about charismatic figures
(Picasso and Hemingway, among others), it was a surprise best-seller in the
U.S. and made Stein a celebrity; she remained an affectionately-regarded
public figure for the rest of her life. However, at her death and for
decades after, she was not a respectable object of critical attention: to
university critics, Joyce, Pound, and Eliot had set the standard for
literary achievement; Stein's work seemed a formless self-indulgence. It
was not until the latter decades of the twentieth century with the rise of
feminist critics and poets, of the U.S. innovative poetic tendency,
Language writing, and of post-structuralism that Stein began to be taken
seriously. In the twenty-first century, while her writing still raises
controversy, it is prominent in the modernist canon.

Stein was born in Allegheny, Pennsylvania, and grew up in California.
Intellectually ambitious, she attended Radcliffe College, studying with the
psychologist William James, and beginning, in 1897, medical training at
Johns Hopkins University. She soon dropped out and travelled to Europe with
her brother Leo. They settled in Paris in 1903 where they became interested
in post-Impressionist and Cubist art, meeting Picasso and other painters,
and amassing a pioneering and influential collection of work. In 1908 she
met Alice B. Toklas, who became her lifelong companion. With the exception
of a lecture tour in the U.S, Stein spent the rest of her life in France,
though she wrote almost exclusively in English and strongly self-identified
as American. Stein's interest in science, her passion for painting, and the
fact of her being lesbian are now seen as key factors in her work.

Stein is difficult to categorize: neither high modernist nor avant-garde
are accurate labels. High modernist reading habits -- where striking
imagery, intricate historical and literary reference, economy of phrase,
and complexity of procedure are valued -- will find little of interest in
her work. And while her writing strikes first-time readers as quite
strange, Stein is unlike other avant-garde figures in that provocation was
never a primary goal. Rather, she was engaged in a lifelong exploration of
her medium (words) with the expectation that public recognition would
ensue. Whether in the hermetic work of the 1910s and 1920s or in the more
popular work of the 1930s and 1940s, Stein was not trying to shock the
public, but to reach it.

Stein's early work reflected the influence of William James. It is
nominally fiction, but Stein was more interested in a scientific analysis
of character-types than in presenting a compelling narrative arc. Q.E.D.
(1905) is an account of a deadlocked lesbian love-triangle. "Melanctha,"
the central story of Three Lives (1909) and one of Stein's best-known
pieces, is a retelling of Q.E.D. using African-American protagonists, one
man and two women. It has occasioned critical controversies. Novelist
Richard Wright celebrated it as a pioneering effort in presenting African-
American characters and language seriously; but others have critiqued it
for racist condescension. It has been read as extending the stylistic
possibilities of naturalism or as having initiated Stein's turn toward a
nonrepresentational, textually-focused writing. Stein's novel The Making of
Americans took this turn toward textuality much farther. A narrative of two
families can be discerned in its almost one thousand pages, but what is
foregrounded is the increasing stylistic extremity: the simplest words
assembled into long, gerund-packed sentences and then into long paragraphs.
Careful readers will find continual minute variations of phrase and
sentence; if one reads for plot, the book will be intolerably repetitious.
Stein considered The Making of Americans a masterpiece, but it has found
few readers.

From this point on, the categorizing influence of William James gave way to
writing strategies based on modern painting, with Stein abandoning any
gesture toward fiction, and presenting her work as the written analog of
Post-Impressionist and Cubist innovation. With Tender Buttons (1912) and
pieces that she termed "portraits," Stein experimented with the basic
mechanisms of representation, inventing, according to some, a kind of
written Cubism.

She spoke of learning from Cezanne that one should not resolve a painting
into subject matter dramatized by distinctions of foreground and
background; rather, one should consider every brush stroke of equal
importance. The lesson she took from this was to abandon narrative, loosen
ordinary syntactic sequence, and to treat words as autonomous entities.
Stein spoke of such procedures as "the continuous present." She didn't stop
using ordinary diction, but she would also splice phrases together: "a
sentence should be arbitrary it should not please be better"; and she would
use words a-syntactically as if juxtaposed in a Cubist collage: "Black ink
best wheel bale brown." Treating language in what can be termed a painterly
fashion allowed Stein to continually play across distinctions of sameness
and difference. Take the following sentence: "I cannot tell you how often
like and alike are not alike." Here, the second "alike" is used
conventionally, but the first used as a unique object, approximately: "this
instance of the word 'alike.'"

Occasioned by the success of The Autobiography of Alice B. Toklas, Stein
toured the U.S. in 1934-5, lecturing on her work. The results, Lectures in
America, are a useful primer for reading her work, as is an earlier
lecture, "Composition as Explanation" (1923). In the last fifteen years of
her life, Stein wrote as a public figure, mixing more accessible work such
as Everybody's Autobiography (1937) and Wars I Have Seen (1945) with more
hermetic writing such as The Geographical History of America (1936). Her
opera Four Saints in Three Acts (1934) with music by Virgil Thomson, was
received enthusiastically.


further reading

Stein, G. (1998), Writings, 1903-1932 and Writings, 1932-1946, New York:
Library of America.
Chessman, H. (1989), The Public Is Invited to Dance, Stanford: Stanford
University Press.
Corn, W. and Latimer, T (2011), Seeing Gertrude Stein, Berkeley: University
of California Press.
DeKoven, M. (1983), A Different Language, Madison: University of Wisconsin
Press.
Dydo, U, (2003). Gertrude Stein: The Language that Rises, Evanston:
Northwestern University Press.
Mellow, J., (1974) Charmed Circle, New York: Praeger.
Ngai, S. (2003), Ugly Feelings, Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Perelman, B. (1996), The Trouble with Genius, Berkeley: University of
California Press.
