Taylor & Francis – Encyclopedia of Modernism



About you

[Salutation]

Sorcha

[Middle name]

O’Brien



[Enter your biography]



[Enter the institution with which you are affiliated]



Your article

Stephenson, Sam (1933-2006)

[Enter any variant forms of your headword – OPTIONAL]

Sam Stephenson was a controversial Irish architect whose work throughout the 1970s and 1980s sparked debates about Brutalist architecture and planning regulations. His best known works included large scale developments for banks, civic and commercial offices in Dublin, often accompanied by protests about the destruction of existing architecture and archaeology. His headquarters for the Electricity Supply Board is a horizontal Miesian design (see Fig. 1), but is more notorious for levelling the central section of Dublin’s Georgian Mile. Only two of his four monumental towers for Dublin Corporation Civic Offices were built, due to the discovery of extensive Viking remains on the site and subsequent popular protests (see Fig. 2 & 3). The Central Bank of Ireland tower was unashamed in its use of unadorned structure (see Fig. 4), with concrete slabs suspended from twin central cores, sparking controversy about planning height regulations in Dublin’s historical centre.

Sam Stephenson was a controversial Irish architect whose work throughout the 1970s and 1980s sparked debates about BRUTALIST architecture and planning regulations. His best known works included large scale developments for banks, civic and commercial offices in Dublin, often accompanied by protests about the destruction of existing architecture and archaeology. His headquarters for the Electricity Supply Board is a horizontal Miesian design, but is more notorious for levelling the central section of Dublin’s Georgian Mile. Only two of his four monumental towers for Dublin Corporation Civic Offices were built, due to the discovery of extensive Viking remains on the site and subsequent popular protests. The Central Bank of Ireland tower was unashamed in its use of unadorned structure, with concrete slabs suspended from twin central cores, sparking controversy about planning height regulations in Dublin’s historical centre.



List of Works

1958 Stephenson House, 31 Leeson Close, Dublin, Ireland.

1965 Electricity Supply Board Headquarters, Fitzwilliam Street, Dublin, Ireland.

1971 Dublin Institute of Advanced Studies, Burlington Road, Dublin, Ireland.

1970 Irish Pavilion, Expo ’70, Osaka, Japan.

1976 Dublin Corporation Civic Offices Phase 1, Wood Quay, Dublin, Ireland.

1979 Currency Centre, Sandyford, Dublin, Ireland.

1978 Central Bank of Ireland, Dame Street, Dublin, Ireland.

Further reading:

(Rowley)

(Stephenson, Sam)

(Number 31 Dublin: Boutique Guesthouse Accomodation )