
Surrealism

Originating as a literary movement in Paris, Surrealism was initially
defined in relation to its literary precursors in the early periodical
Littrature (1919-1924), set up by artists and writers including Andr
Breton, Louis Aragon and Philippe Soupault. In 1924, Breton formally
enunciated the intentions of Surrealism in the Manifeste du surralisme
(Manifesto of surrealism, 1924). The principle aims of the manifesto were
to define Surrealism, declare its members and communicate its methods and
intentions. In the same year, writers and artists including Paul luard,
Louis Aragon and Benjamin Pret, set up the Bureau of Surrealist
Research, an office space in a central Paris location where they aimed to
record the forms and expressions of the subconscious mind. These findings
were discussed and documented in the pseudo-scientific periodical La
Rvolution surraliste (1924-1929). Members of the movement during this
period included prominent visual artists such as Max Ernst, Andr Masson,
Hans Arp, Marcel Duchamp and Man Ray, with others joining the movement,
such as Salvador Dal, Francis Picabia, Giorgio De Chirico, Mret
Oppenheim, Yves Tanguy and Alberto Giacometti in the mid-1920s, as
Surrealism gained more attention. Other key visual artists associated with
the movement include Pablo Picasso and Joan Mir, who never officially
joined but exerted influence on Surrealism and adopted surrealist
principles in their own work. Surrealism found international success in the
1930s, survived World War II and expired in the 1960s.

Their Surrealist ideas were influenced by the rising popularity of
psychoanalysis in the 1920s and 30stwenties and thirties and informed by
the ideas of Sigmund Freud (1856-1939). Freuds theories of the unconscious
underpinned Surrealisms emphasis on the creative possibilities of chance,
desire and dream. Rather than create purely objective representations, the
surrealists, as ardent disciples of Freudian psychoanalysis,
favouredretreated to inner experience and the unconscious, fostering an
approach to text and image as one of process and self-reflection.. Through
psychic automatism the surrealists created an alternative means of
experiencing reality. Automatic writing, the manifestation of this process,
superseded the novel as Ssurrealisms chosen textual format. Automatic
writing was supplemented by the development of new visual techniques in
which unusual juxtapositions of objects and images were combined through
methods including photomontage and collage, produced by artists like Max
Ernst and Dora Maar (1891-1976).  Ernst pioneered the automatic processes
of frottage and grattage.  Andr Masson explored the process of automatism
through drawing and paint, Man Ray pioneered experimental photographic
techniques, and Dal realised surrealist ideas through paint, installations
and surreal objects. Oscar Dominguez made use of delcalcomania, where paint
is applied to paper which is then folded or pressed against another sheet,
the resulting image sometimes augmented by drawing. Picasso also employed
surrealist themes and techniques in his practice, exploring violence,
eroticism and metamorphosis during the 1930s. Aspects of Surrealism can
also be traced in the paintings of Mir. After moving to Paris in 1921,
Mirs paintings, such as The Tilled Field (1923-1924), became more
imaginative and dream-like, leading Breton to describe him as the most
surrealist of us all. (Breton, 1928: p.37).

Surrealism was also underpinned by a strong political ideology. Surrealism
emerged out of Dada, a movement whose nihilist, anti-art sentiments were
developed as a response to the state of Europe after the Great War. Most
surrealists subscribed to a Trotskyist interpretation of Marxism and
aligned themselves with Communism. Political, ideological and creative
differences led to a number of splits in the group by the time of the
Second Manifesto of Surrealism in 1930, with a number of members excluded
from the group. Salvador Dal was later rejected because of his supposed
support of Francisco Francos fascist regime in Spain and Georges Bataille
and Antonin Artaud also departed from the surrealist group due to
ideological differences. Bataille went on to pioneer his own form of
dissident Surrealism in the periodicals Documents (1929-1930) and Acphale
(1936-1939).

As the movement gained attention traction in Paris, their influence took
hold in other countries, attracting artists from Belgium like Ren Magritte
(1898-1967), Paul Noug and Marcel Marin, with a strand of the movement
founded in Czechoslovakia in 1934 by poet Vtzslav Nezval (1900-1958),
before reaching the Americas in the early 1940s when many surrealists left
occupied France during the Second World War. In Britain the movement came
into prominence in the 1930s. Roland Penrose (1900-1984) catalysed the
development of a British surrealist movement which included Henry Moore
(18981986), Humphrey Jennings (1907-1950) and Eileen Agar (1899-1991).
Surrealism (1936), a collection of essays edited by critic Herbert Read was
published in 1936 on the occasion of the International Surrealist
Exhibition, which opened at the New Burlington Galleries in London in June
1936. Following David Gascoynes A Short Survey of Surrealism (1935), the
exhibition introduced Ssurrealism to a British audience, affirming the
existence of a British surrealist group, which had been functioning without
formal unity through exhibitions and periodicals from the early thirties.
In the Post-War period surrealist activity continued with major exhibitions
in Paris and New York, yet was geographically dispersed and often absorbed
and overshadowed by developing abstract movements such as Abstract
Expressionism.

Scholarly discussions of Surrealism have increasingly departed from a focus
on a canonical body of artists and writers (circulating around Breton) to a
broader understanding of Surrealism which encompasses marginal figures and
the geographical expansion of Surrealism across Europe, Japan and South
America. Coupled with a growing awareness of Surrealisms relationship to
politics, science, psychoanalysis and other intellectual impulses of the
period, like the occult, such approaches have presented a fuller picture of
Surrealism and celebrated its impact on twentieth century thought and
culture. Surrealisms influence on queer artists and theory, for example,
have now been explored in the work of artists Claude Cahun (1894-1954) and
Pierre Molinier (1900-1976). Women artists have also received increasing
attention in the context of Surrealism. Historically, the celebration of
creativity and its relationship to sexual desire within Surrealism occluded
the expression of women who were positioned as muse, femme fatale, or femme
enfant. Women were often not members of the official group, rather,
contributed as partners or creative subjects and were largely excluded from
official activities. Correlating with the rise of feminism and the
establishment of a feminist art history, Xavire Gauthiers Surralisme et
Sexualit (1971) sparked a series of critical responses to this male
dominance. A striking amount of critical attention has since been devoted
to the role of sexuality and desire in surrealist art. Landmark studies,
which sought to rectify the marginalisation of women in surrealist
practice, such as Whitney Chadwicks Women Artists and the Surrealist
Movement (1985) and the exhibition Mirror Images: Women, Surrealism and
Self-Representation (1998) and its accompanying literature, have opened up
new readings of the role of women in Surrealism. Female artists married to
male surrealists such as Dorothea Tanning, Dora Maar, Claude Cahun, Leonora
Carrington, Leonor Fini, Remedios Varo, Meret Oppenheim,  (1910-2012),
Valentine Penrose (1898-1978) and Lee Miller (1907-1977) are now celebrated
as artists on the own terms.

The word surreal is now commonly used as an adjective to describe the
unusual or unexpected. Despite the terms detachment from the original
movement, methods and ideas generated in the context of Surrealism have
endured and are recognisable in contemporary art practice. Artists
including Louise Bourgeois (1911-2010) and swathes of YBAs adapted methods
and ideas pioneered by surrealist artists, such as the objet trouv (found
object). Surrealisms contribution to the development of experimental
cinema also endures with the work of directors like Luis Buuel (1900-1983)
continuing to have influence today. After Bretons death in 1966, many
believed that Surrealism, as an official movement, was over. Yet,
collectives which developed from the Parisian origins and identify
themselves as surrealist are still active across the U.K in Leeds, London
and Birmingham, and in Czechoslovakia and Chicago.

References and further reading:

Ades, D. (1978) Dada  and  Surrealism  Reviewed  (exh.  Cat),  London:  Arts
Council of Great Britain.

Angliviel de la Beaumelle, A. (1991), Andr Breton:  La  beaut  convulsive,
Paris: ditions du Centre Pompidou.
Bate, D. (2004) Photography and Surrealism, London: I B Tauris
Breton, A. (1928) Le surrealisme et la peinture, Paris: Gallimard.
    (republished by Museum of Fine Arts, Boston (2002)
Breton, A. (2010) Manifestoes of Surrealism, trans., Richard Seaver and
    Helen R. Lane, Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.

Chadwick, W. (1985) Women Artists and the Surrealist Movement, London:
    Thames and Hudson.
Gauthier, X. (1971) Surralisme et Sexualit
Lewis, H. (1990), Dada turns red: the politics of Surrealism, Edinburgh:
Edinburgh University Press
Matheson, N. (Ed.) (2006): The Sources of Surrealism: Art in Context,
Aldershot: Lund Humphries.
Mundy, J. (2001), Surrealism: Desire Unbound (Exh Cat.) London: Tate
Gallery,
Read, H. (1936) ed., Surrealism, London: Faber & Faber.
Richardson, M. (2006), Surrealism and Cinema, London: Berg
Spies, W. (1991), Max Ernst: Collages: The Invention of the Surrealist
Universe, London: Thames & Hudson

Centre for the Study of Surrealism and its Legacies.
http://www.surrealismcentre.ac.uk/
Web site of a collaborative project involving Manchester University,
University of Essex and Tate. Includes free access to an online journal
that publishes contemporary surrealist scholarship.

Images
[pic]


Max Ernst Pieta or Revolution by Night (1923) Oil on canvas
http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artworks/ernst-pieta-or-revolution-by-night-
t03252
 ADAGP, Paris and DACS, London 2002

License this image

[pic]


Salvador Dali Lobster Telephone (1936) Steel, plaster, rubber, resin and
paper.
http://www.tate.org.uk/art/artworks/dali-lobster-telephone-t03257
 Salvador Dali, Gala-Salvador Dali Foundation/DACS, London 2002

License this image

[pic]

Dora Maar Pre Ubu (1936) Gelatin silver print

http://www.metmuseum.org/collection/the-collection-online/search/286239

Rights and Reproduction:  2011 Artists Rights Society (ARS), New York












[pic]

Man Ray, Cadeau 1921, editioned replica 1972
www.tate.org.uk/art/artworks/man-ray-cadeau-t07883
[ Man Ray Trust/ADAGP, Paris and DACS, London 2002]

[pic]

Sir Roland Penrose, Le Grand Jour, 1938
www.tate.org.uk/art/artworks/penrose-le-grand-jour-t00671
[ The estate of Sir Roland Penrose]
