
TAHIMIK, KIDLAT (3 October 1942-)

Kidlat Tahimik, born Eric de Guia in Baguio City, the Philippines, is a
Filipino filmmaker most famous for his works Mababangong Bangungot
(Perfumed Nightmare, 1977), Turumba (1983), and Bakit Dilaw Ang Kulay ng
Bahaghari (I Am Furious Yellow, 198194).  After receiving an MBA from the
Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania, Tahimik turned to Third
World filmmaking to decry Western capitalism and American influence on the
Philippines.  Tahimiks critique of capitalism extends to his self-imposed
circumstances of production: Tahimik creates film on what Christopher
Pavsek calls a cups of gas philosophy, continuing film production little
by little as there is money to pay for it and maintaining control of the
process, an inversion of Hollywood-style studio investment.  Because of
this, Tahimiks shooting schedules tend to extend over years and even
decades.  Tahimiks political concerns are reflected in the content of the
films themselves, which call attention to their own haphazard funding
through a variety of playful means with serious import: deliberately low-
budget special effects, re-enactments using friends and family, and an
insistent directors narrative voiceover reminding the viewer of the
financial constraints of Filipino filmmaking.  I Am Furious Yellow, a semi-
documentary showing among other things Kidlats education of his son Kidlat
de Guia against the background of the rise of Corazon Aquinos People Power
movement, was filmed and screened at festivals in various incarnations over
the course of the 1980s and early 1990s, accumulating titles as it grew
longer.  Since 1982, Tahimik has occasionally worked on the eternally
unfinished Magellan.

Further reading:
Pavsek, C. (2013) The Utopia of Film: Cinema and Its Futures in Godard,
Kluge, and Tahimik, New York: Columbia University Press.

List of works:
Mababangong Bangungot (Perfumed Nightmare, 1977)
Turumba (1983)
Bakit Dilaw Ang Kulay ng Bahaghari (I Am Furious Yellow, 198194, also
known as Why Is Yellow the Middle of the Rainbow?)
Magellan (uncompleted, also known as Ang Balikbayan (Memories of
Overdevelopment))

Paratextual materials:
The bridge sequence from Perfumed Nightmare:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ucXIiAUMlHo

Kendall Heitzman
University of Iowa

