Taylor & Francis – Encyclopedia of Modernism



About you

[Salutation]

Jill

[Middle name]

Smith



[Enter your biography]



Bowdoin College



Your article

Tergit, Gabriele (1894-1982)

[Enter any variant forms of your headword – OPTIONAL]

Gabriele Tergit was a respected journalist and novelist who lived and worked in Berlin, Germany in the 1920s and early 1930s. She mastered the journalistic short form of the feuilleton, an essay that offers subjective impressions of modern urban life. Tergit incorporated excerpts from her feuilletons into her critically acclaimed 1931 novel Käsebier erobert den Kurfürstendamm. She also had a successful career as a courtroom reporter who championed women’s reproductive rights and criticised the conservative bias of the German judiciary, but her activist journalism made her a target of the National Socialists, and she and her family fled Germany in March of 1933.

Gabriele Tergit was a respected journalist and novelist who lived and worked in Berlin, Germany in the 1920s and early 1930s. She mastered the journalistic short form of the feuilleton, an essay that offers subjective impressions of modern urban life. Tergit incorporated excerpts from her feuilletons into her critically acclaimed 1931 novel Käsebier erobert den Kurfürstendamm. She also had a successful career as a courtroom reporter who championed women’s reproductive rights and criticised the conservative bias of the German judiciary, but her activist journalism made her a target of the National Socialists, and she and her family fled Germany in March of 1933. After living in exile in Czechoslovakia and Palestine, she settled in London, England in 1938, where she resided until her death in 1982.



Tergit was born Elise Hirschmann in 1894 in Berlin to a wealthy Jewish family. She received a progressive education, and after the First World War she studied history, philosophy, and sociology at universities in Munich, Heidelberg, Frankfurt am Main, and Berlin, earning her doctoral degree in 1925. Parallel to her studies, she worked as a freelance journalist, writing feuilletons for two of the most widely distributed liberal bourgeois newspapers in Berlin, the Vossische Zeitung and the Berliner Tageblatt. Early in her writing career, she adopted the pseudonym Gabriele Tergit to shield herself from her family’s disapproval of her chosen profession. From 1925 to 1933, she worked as the primary legal correspondent for the Berliner Tageblatt and was part of the newspaper’s full-time editorial staff.



In 1928 Tergit married the architect Heinrich Julius Reifenberg; their son Peter was born that same year. She also began writing articles and essays for the left-liberal journal Die Weltbühne, a periodical that featured works by some of Germany’s most well-known cultural critics and satirists. Amidst the deepening financial and political crises of the late Weimar Republic, Tergit published her novel Käsebier erobert den Kurfürstendamm (1931), which combines a matter-of-fact narrative tone with the frequent use of terse dialogue, often written in the Berlin dialect. The novel tells of the folksinger Käsebier’s meteoric rise to fame and his equally swift fall back into obscurity, and it is a biting satire of the advertising and entertainment industries and their hollow production of stardom. In both her journalistic work and her novel, Tergit laments the decline of critical journalism and the rise of reactionary political forces within Germany. During her years in exile, Tergit continued to write, publishing the bourgeois family epic Effingers in 1951. Between 1954 and 1981, she served as the secretary of the PEN association of German authors in exile. She died in 1982 in London.



File: Keun.jpg

Figure 1.

Source: http://www.mhpbooks.com/books/after-midnight/





File: Tergit.jpg

Figure 2.

Source: http://www.spiegel.de/fotostrecke/gerichtsreporterin-gabriele-tergit-fotostrecke-108946.html





Key Works

Novels

Käsebier erobert den Kurfürstendamm (1931)

Effingers (1951)



Essays and Journalistic Works

Atem einer anderen Welt: Berliner Reportagen (1994)

Further reading:

(GermanBookOfficeNY)

(Sutton)