Taylor & Francis – Encyclopedia of Modernism



About you

[Salutation]

Eve

[Middle name]

Loh



[Enter your biography]



[Enter the institution with which you are affiliated]



Your article

Yorozu, Tesugoro

[Enter any variant forms of your headword – OPTIONAL]

Yorozu Tetsugorô was a Yôga (Western-style) painter who was associated with the avant-garde movement of the Taishô years (1912 – 1926).

Yorozu Tetsugorô was a Yôga (Western-style) painter who was associated with the avant-garde movement of the Taishô years (1912 – 1926). His foray into art started early when studying Ôshita Tôjirô’s ( 大下藤次郎) A Guide to Watercolours. Prior to enrolling at the Tokyo School of Fine Arts in Western-style painting, he was already attending meetings and study sessions at the Hakubakai (White Horse Society 白馬会 1896 – 1911). In 1907, he entered the Tokyo School of Fine Arts and graduated in 1912.  His graduation work, A Nude Beauty (1912), drew much attention and was thought to be a pioneering work of Japanese Fauvism. The work is designated today as an Important Cultural Property. Yorozu’s works around in this period showed the influence of both Fauvism and Cubism. His landscapes and portraits were well received at the Nikakai (Second Section Association, 1914- present), which was opened to showcasing younger and more avant-garde artists’ works. Due to health reasons, he moved away from Tokyo to recuperate, but continued, when possible, to exhibit at the Nikaten (exhibitions of the Nikakai). Although he was unsuccessful at his attempts at the government sponsored Teiten, Yorozu continued with his explorations in art, specifically in Nanga (literati painting) and Nihonga (Japanese-style painting). He passed away in 1927 and left behind him a legacy as Japan’s pioneer of Cubism and Fauvism. 



Further reading:

		

 (Clark)

(Volk, In Pursuit of Universalism: Yorozu Tetsugoro and Japanese Modern Art ) 

(Volk, The Japanese Expressionist: Yorozu Tetsugorô (1885-1927) and the Language of Modern Art)