
Seven and Five Society

The painter, Ivon Hitchens (1893  1979), led the founding of the Seven &
Five Society in London in 1919, primarily as an exhibiting society for its
original membership of seven painters and five sculptors.  By 1926 the
membership grew to twenty and by the time of the last of its fourteen
exhibitions in 1935, eighty-seven artists had taken part in its shows. In
its early years the Society eschewed the promotion of any particular
approach to art and was open to artists of all styles. In 1924, however,
Hitchens invited Ben Nicholson to join and under Nicholsons later
chairmanship the character of the Society changed. After a period in which
a modern but varied approach to representational art was encouraged,
Nicholson won a vote which restricted exhibition entries to non-figurative
abstract works. The result was the break-up of the Society, though not
before its final exhibition which included abstract works by Nicholson,
Barbara Hepworth, Henry Moore and John Piper; this was the first all-
abstract exhibition ever to be held in London.

The main concern of the young artists who were the first members of the
Society was to obtain exhibiting opportunities. Their manifesto stated that
members were free to pursue their own styles; that the Society was not a
group formed to advertise a new ism and that the object of its members
was merely to express what they feel in terms that shall be intelligible,
and not to demonstrate a theory or attack a tradition (Harrison 1981:164-
165). With this emphasis on what it was not, rather than on any new
artistic objective, it is unlikely that without Hitchens the Society would
have achieved historical significance. It was Hitchens invitation of Ben
Nicholson to join in 1924 which eventually led to the Society becoming a
platform for new approaches to art in Britain.

Nicholson was elected chairman in 1926, soon after he had abandoned his
first tentative experiments with abstraction, and for several years
thereafter selected exhibitors who displayed more progressive approaches to
representation than many of the Societys original members. The new
entrants included artists like Claude Flight who was influenced by
Futurism, and others, including Hitchens and Frances Hodgkins, whose free
handling of paint and structural patterning sometimes tended towards
abstraction. As chairman, Nicholson took a leading role in the selection of
seven of the eleven artists who joined between 1926 and 1931. They included
his first wife, Winifred, the painters Christopher Wood and Jessica
Dismorr, and the sculptor who would later become one of Britains most
famous artists, Henry Moore.

In 1932 Nicholson made the first of several visits to Paris and met leading
European abstract artists including Jean Hlion, Jean Arp, Moholy-Nagy and
Piet Mondrian. These contacts encouraged his emerging interest in
geometrically-based abstraction which in time led him to be recognised as
Britains leading pre-war abstract artist. Invited by Hlion, he and his
second wife, Barbara Hepworth, joined the Paris-based abstract group,
Abstraction-Creation and in 1933 he also joined the newly-formed Unit One
group of British painters, sculptors and architects..

Now wholly committed to abstraction and in an increasingly dominant role in
the 7 and 5 Society, Nicholson pushed through a rule change in 1934 to
restrict members and exhibitors to non-figurative painters and sculptors.
The Society was also renamed the 7 & 5 Abstract Group. The result was the
resignation or expulsion of all the artists who did not comply with the new
rule, leaving a final membership of only eight, five of whom were
Nicholsons relatives or personal friends. The latter included  John Piper
during a short phase of abstract painting (he soon retuned to figuration)
and John Cecil Stephenson, a consistent constructive abstractionist. The
1935 exhibition of their work in the Zwemmer gallery in London is the first
known exhibition in London devoted entirely to abstraction and constitutes
a significant event in British art history.



References and further reading


Checkland, S. J. (2000) Ben Nicholson: the Vicious Circles of his Life and
Art,
            London: John Murray
Corbett D. P. ((1970 The Modernity of English Art 1914 30, Manchester:
Manchester
            University Press
Harrison, C. (1981)  English Art and Modernism 1900  -1939, New Haven &
London:
           Yale University Press
Shone, R. (1977) The Century of Change: British Painting Since 1900,
Oxford:
            Phaidon Press



Images


[pic]
Ivon Hitchens, Autumn Composition, 1932, oil on canvas, 78.1 x 111.1 cms

www,tate.org.uk/art/artworks/hitchens-autumn-composition-flowers-on-a-table-
t02215
     [pic]
Ben Nicholson, Painting: Still Life, 1934-36, oil on canvass, 41 x 50.6 cms


www.tate.org.uk/art/artworks/nicolson-1934-6-painting-still-life-t07007






