
Brug, De (The Bridge) (1928)

Eva Hielscher (Ghent University)

De Brug [The Bridge] is a black-and-white short silent film by Joris Ivens
about the Koningshavenbrug in Rotterdam, a railroad lift bridge built
between 1925 and 1927 also known as De Hef (The Lift). An iconic title of
the Dutch avant-garde, the film brought Ivens international recognition.
The film is largely a lyrical and abstract study; it presents the bridge as
a masterpiece of modern engineering and shows the motion of, on, and around
the steel construction, including all kinds of modern traffic. A train
stops when the bridge lifts up, allowing ships to pass underneath on the
river Maas. Ivens explores the bridge from multiple perspectives using
extreme high and low angles, thus emphasizing a modern perception of
fragmentation and re-composition. In a self-reflexive way, he demonstrates
this perception as the rationale of cinema by integrating images of his
35mm Kinamo camera and himself at the beginning of the film. Shot against
the background of Rotterdams skyline in a dynamic composition, the bridge
becomes a product of cinema. Ivens film celebrates the aesthetic of the
machine in its encounter of two pieces of modern technology: The Lift and
the film camera.

Further reading:
- Gunning, T. (2002) Joris Ivens. Filmmaker of the Twentieth Century, of
the Netherlands and the World, in Andr Stufkens (ed), Cinema without
Borders. The Catalog of the Joris Ivens North American Tour 2002, Nijmegen:
European Foundation Joris Ivens, 18-27.
- Ivens, J. (1969) The Camera and I, Berlin: Seven Seas Publishers.
- Paalman, F. (2011) Cinematic Rotterdam. The Times and Tides of a Modern
City, Rotterdam: 010 Publishers.
- Stufkens, A. (1999) The Song of Movement: Joris Ivenss First Films and
the Cycle of the Avant-Garde, in Kees Bakker (ed), Joris Ivens and the
Documentary Context, Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press, 46-71.
- Waugh, T. (1981) Joris Ivens and the Evolution of the Radical Documentary
1926-1946, PhD Dissertation, Columbia University.



Additional information for the editors/web designers:
Copyright: Marceline Loridan-Ivens (Ivens widow)
Restoration and preservation: EYE Film Institute Netherlands (amongst
others)
Notes on restoration and preservation: Film prints of The Bridge are spread
across film archives around the world, including various versions of the
film. However EYE Film Institute Netherlands (Netherlands Filmmuseum at the
time) restored The Bridge in 1994/1995 using original nitrate elements from
the Filmmuseum collection, MoMa, the Danish Film Institute and the
Cinmathque Franaise. The Joris Ivens DVD box set (European Foundation
Joris Ivens, JUST Entertainment/ARTE/Facets, 2008) contains another,
slightly different version that was reconstructed particularly for the DVD
box. There are no film prints or higher quality digital copies of this
version (only DVD and Digi-Beta).

Weblinks for further information:
European Foundation Joris Ivens: http://www.ivens.nl
EYE Film Institute Netherlands: http://www.eyefilm.nl

