
Writer: Sandip K Luis

The Baroda Figurative-Narrative Movement

The Baroda Figurative-Narrative Movement was a loosely organised but highly
influential development in the Indian art of early-1980s against modernist
abstraction in general and its puritanism in particular.  Though this novel
enthusiasm towards narration and figurative painting had not claimed any
regional or ideological identity and the artists affiliated to it have been
from many parts of India with varying styles of painting, its association
with the Baroda artworld (whose nucleus was the Fine Arts Faculty of the M.
S University in Baroda, Gujarat) made the appellative Baroda in its name,
along with its identification as a movement or school, quite common.
The inaugural event of the movement is considered to be the renowned Place
for People exhibition (1981) of which the participants were Jogen
Chowdhury, Bhupen Khakhar, Nalini Malani, Sudhir Patwardhan, Gulammohammed
Sheikh and Vivan Sundaram. The manifesto-like essay for the exhibition
catalogue was written by the art historian Geeta Kapur.  The
complementarity of the movement with the general return of painting in
the international art scene of 1980s, the figurative and narrative turn
in the rejuvenating British painting and last but not the least, many of
its artists institutional alliance with the Royal College of Art and the
British artworld made it a highly successful venture whose most important
and immediate result in the increasingly liberalising India was the
creation of a visible art market.

FORMATION OF THE NAME AND IDEOLOGY

In discussing the Baroda-centred art practices of 1980s, the term
figurative-narrative carries an ambiguous lineage. Though it first
appeared in Geeta Kapurs essay Realism and Modernism (1979-80), the term
as such was not present in the catalogue essay written for the Place for
People. Instead, in Kapurs as well as many other writings produced by the
proponents of the movement, the concepts figurative and narrative
enjoyed separate but synergetic functions  the former to brand the new
artists against the abstractionists and the latter, vaguely, to the
linguistic outcome of their aesthetic.

      Whereas the term figurative was already established in Indian art as
an oppositional category against abstract by the end of 1960s, the term
narrative was, according to Sheikh, first introduced by the British
artist Timothy Hyman (who served as a Visiting Professor in Baroda between
1980 and 1982). In 1979, Hyman curated a travelling exhibition, Narrative
Painting: Figurative Art of Two Generations, in Britain, to which he
invited Bhupen Khahar as an honorary member, along with a group of British
artists including R. B. Kitaj, Peter de Francia (both from the Royal
College of Art and the mentors of Sundaram and Kapur respectively) and
Howard Hodgkin (who was, despite being an abstract painter, a close
associate of the artists of Place for People as Sundarams painting
People Come and Go, displayed in the exhibition, suggests.

      Whereas the enthusiasm towards figurative painting in the British art
of early-1980s was received highly critically by its leftist circles, the
figurative-narrative movement in the Indian counterpart of the same period
maintained almost a leftist, if not exactly Marxist, identity with less
controversy, at least until the intervention of the Indian Radical
Painters and Sculptors Association (see below). Part of its reason lies in
the successful launching of the Journal of Arts and Ideas in 1982 (until
1999), a leftist trimonthly, which had Kapur, Sundaram and Patwardhan as
the founding members in its editorial board. (The first edition of the
journal carried an extensive review of Place for People by Ajay Sinha and
an art historical justification to figurative-narrative art by Kapur.)
Moreover, though Kapurs catalogue-essay for Place for People was devoid
of any ideological partisanship other than a strong defence of figurative
art, her Realism and Modernism essay was originally a paper presented at
a seminar on Marxism and Aesthetics  organised by the Kasauli Art Centre
(founded by Sundaram) with the collaboration of the Indian leftist journal
Social Scientist in 1979. Kapurs theorisation of figurative-narrative as
a synonym for realism in art, that too with extensive references to the
recently released English translation of the famous Realism-Modernism
debate of western Marxism, placed the new aesthetic in a discourse
diametrically opposite to Hymans subjectivism. Thus, drawing from Frederic
Jamesons afterword to the debate, she argued that the dialectical thrust
of realism/modernism seems to point towards a figural art that is narrative
and objective. The representative of such a realist aesthetic for Kapur
was the recent art of R. B. Kitaj (who himself was, as she notes, an
admirer of Walter Benjamin as well as the literary realists like Tolstoy
and Dostoevsky) in which ordinary people were portrayed in the way they
expose the viewer to others pain, to his own bad conscience, to a shared
neurosis .

      However, it is important to note that the movement, in its entirety,
did not have a coherent ideology or outlook other than a liberal-pluralist
one verging on leftist theorisations. As Sundaram put it later, because it
[Place for People] was not organised as a movement to support a
manifesto, each of us have retracted a little bit into our own personal
preoccupation and let the work follow a logic of its own. Only a survey of
the sociocultural context of the time can tell us how the movement could
be, despite its short lifespan and lack of any explicit ideology, an
important event in Indian art history.

CONTEXT

A motivating force behind the rediscovery of realism in the aesthetic of
the figurative-narrative was the historical necessity to respond to the
overarching institutional crisis of modernism in India. Unlike in the
advanced capitalist countries such as Britain where the return of painting
and disavowal of avant-gardist strategies were received as conservative
trends, an anti-institutional or avant-gardist intervention in art was
generally discouraged even in the leftist pockets of the Indian artworld.
The decline of Indias states modernization project and the rise of non-
secular forces in early-1970s, the declaration of Emergency in 1975 over
two years and following it, the chaos in the national politics were
paralleled in the Indian artworld by similar instances of decay and
degeneration. The abstraction in art reached an extremely esoteric and
occult status in the so-called Neo-Tantric movement in early-1970s. The
Emergency was publicly supported by the most celebrated artist of Indian
modernism, M. F Husain, through a series of paintings.  Also, the state
institutions of art such as the National Gallery of Modern Art and the
Lalit Kala Academy faced much criticism for their controversial aesthetic
preferences as well as nepotistic policies (for example, see Kapurs Art
Criticism in India published in 1972 and the catalogue of Six Who
Declined to Show in Triennale, a protest exhibition in 1978 in which many
of the artists of the later figurative-narrative movement actively took
part). It was in such a context which can be identified as a decline of
modernism that a search for an alternative arrived at the idea of
figurative-narrative.

      It is not at all accidental that this new interest in realism
following modernisms decline perfectly coincided with the rise of a new
Indian middle class.  Barring the works of Patwardhan (for its working-
class realist content), most of the paintings exhibited in the Place for
People can be clearly seen as autobiographical narratives of the middle
class artist himself; quoting Chowdhury, the little but intimate corners
of my own . Thus, Sheikhs About Waiting and Wandering (1981) depicted,
and was painted for his wife Nilima Sheikh who was also an artist. His
Revolving Routes (1981) shows a self-portrait of the artist at centre, as
indulged in his personal reveries about from childhood to present life with
friends and colleagues of the Baroda artworld, including Kapur, Sundaram,
Khakhar and Hyman. Sundaram exhibited Portrait of his Father (1980), K. V.
K Sundaram, a powerful bureaucrat and Padma Vibhushan holder, and People
Come and Go, a representation of Khakhars private studio and his friends
including Hodgkin. Malanis Concerning a Friend (1981) depicts a close
conversation between the artist and Geeta Kapur, located in Kapurs
fashionable apartment. And Khakhars You Cant Please All (1981), a complex
painting prefiguring his later declaration of gay identity, sarcastically
narrated the futility of public life and the lure of private pleasures.
Thus, it is such personalised representations of middle class subjectivity
and fantasies that at once became, as the title Place for People
suggests, an objective and realistic representation of the Indian
people of early-1980s.

CRITICISM

The crux of any criticism against the movement lies in the varying
responses to the question of how was it to deal with the crisis of the
1970s and the concurrent decline of modernism. Was it avant-garde or
realism that was the effective antidote to such a degenerated modernism? In
fact, many of the avant-gardist or surrealist strategies (for example,
fragmentation through allegory, multiple perspectives etc.) can be found in
the figurative-narrative language, while strikingly missing the avant-
gardes critique of the institution of art. Thus, Kapurs later thesis that
we had a modernism without avant-garde only describes the reformist
nature of Indian modernism in which figurative-narrative movement has very
much been a part of.

      It is a point of debate whether the aesthetic of the figurative-
narrative artists was quite realist as Kapur had envisaged or simply
postmodernist as it was later severely criticised in the quasi-avant-
gardist manifesto of the Indian Radical Painters and Sculptures
Association written by one of its members, Anita Dube in 1987. For Dube,
The Narrative movement, in India, [] taking character, from the British
example and continuing a tradition of colonial patronage and approval;
[was] the Indian version of an archaeology of historicism emerging from the
post-modern. Whereas Dube and her colleagues were right in pointing out
the role of the British artworld in the success of the figurative-narrative
movement (though it is not clear whether the latters relationship to the
former was a subservient one or not), their branding of the new aesthetic
as postmodern following Frederic Jamesons essay, Postmodernism, or the
Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism (1984), could not go further due to
their inability to locate the crux of the existing historical problematic.
This latter point is clearer in the following remark made by Dube: With
the use of multiple references [], pseudo historical content, []
narration, [and] a rhetorical tone, a myth is created [in the figurative-
narrative paintings] which says that, that which is being portrayed is
reality and the historical. This criticism misses its target in the fact
that it was not exactly in the alleged postmodern language of the narrative
painters that history is confused with myth, but rather the proto-fascist
Hindutva ideology and its populist nationalism to which these artists
fought from the inception of the movement itself . Whereas Sheikhs City
for Sale (1981) was an allegorical narrative of the artists silent
presence within and against the violent world of religious fundamentalism,
Khakhars Celebration of Guru Jayanti (1980)  exhibited in Place for
People along with Sheikhs painting  sarcastically represented a
religious moment in its utmost profanity. Dube and her colleagues failed to
notice that the figurative-narrative artists use of multiple references,
fictive and actual, under the claim of being historical was intended to
oppose the similar efforts made by the proto-fascist forces of the time to
synthesis the cultural multiplicity of the nation to a repressive
homogeneity. But at the same time, they were quite right in locating
certain logic of multinational capitalism  in the movements
institutional success, if not in its aesthetic straightforwardly. The
exhibition Timeless Art in 1988, which was solely dedicated to the new
figurative art by including all six painters of Place for People along
with the several upcoming artists of the Baroda artworld, caused
controversy with Sothebys auction of the exhibits (the first time for
Indian art) and the protest of the Indian Radical Painters and Sculptors
Association against it. Whereas the protest was the last collective action
of the Association outside Kerala (the native place of its members except
Dube), the success of the exhibition and auction consolidated the presence
of the personalities associated with the figurative-narrative movement for
the coming decades of Indian art.

References and Further Reading:

Dube, Anita. (1987) "Questions and Dialogue ." Manifesto of Indian Radical
Painters and Sculptors Association. Exhibition catalogue.

Gopinath and Fibicher. (2007) In Conversation with Gulammohammed Sheikh,"
Horn Please: Narratives in Contemporary Indian Art, Hatje Cantz.

Hyman, T. (1979) Narrative Paintings: Figurative Art of Two Generations,
Bristol: Arnolfini.

Kapur, Geeta. (1979-80) Realism and Modernism: A Polemic for Present-Day
Art. Social Scientist, no 5-6, Vol. 8, Dec. 1979-Jan. 1980, pp: 91-100

Kapur, Geeta. (1981) "Partisan Views about the Human Figure," Place for
People, Bombay: Jahangir Art Gallery ; Delhi: Rabindra Bhavan.

Rajadhyaksha, Ashish. (1997) "The Last Decade" In Contemporary Art in
Baroda, edited by Gulammohammed Sheikh. Tulika: 213-344.

Sinha, Ajay. (1982) "Place for People-New Images", Journal of Arts and
Ideas, October-December 1982: 19-28.

Sinha, Ajay. (1997) "Envisioning the Seventies and the Eighties ",
Contemporary Art in Baroda, edited by Gulammohammed Sheikh. Tulika: 146-
209.

Sundaram, Vivan. (1984) Language, Narrative and the Viewer: A Personal
Reading of the Contemporary Indian Narrative Art, Nandan, Shantiniketan:
Viswabharati: 57-64.

Sundaram, Vivan. (1991) A Tradition of the Modern, Journal of Arts and
Ideas, No 20-21, March 1991: 33-40.

Illustrations

   1. 'People Come and Go' (1981) Vivan Sundaram, Oil on Canvas, 152.4cm x
      123.2cm, Courtsey-Asia Art Archive
      (http://www.aaa.org.hk/Collection/CollectionOnline/SpecialCollectionIte
      m/3456)

      [pic]

   2. 'City for Sale' (1981-4) Gulammohammed Sheikh, Oil on Canvas, Trustees
      of the Victoria and Albert Museum, Image Courtsey-
      www.theotherspaces.com (http://www.theotherspaces.com/Gulam-
      Sheikh/1445/gallery.aspx)

      [pic]







