Tokyo Story (1953)



Tokyo monogatari (Tokyo Story, 1953) is a Japanese family drama co-written and directed by Ozu Yasujiro at Shochiku studios. Renowned as one of the greatest ever made, the film regularly tops domestic and international critic’s polls. Tokyo Story portrays three generations of the Hirayama family brought together by the retired grandparents’ visit from the town of Onomichi to speedily rebuilding postwar Tokyo. However, the old couple (Ryu Chishu and Higashiyama Chieko) receive little attention from their children, preoccupied as they are with work and their own young kids; returning home, the grandmother falls ill and dies. Their mistreatment is contrasted with the generosity of their veteran son’s widow (Hara Setsuko), who the grandfather encourages to remarry in order to live a happy life. Archetypal narratives in Ozu’s films such as this one chart shifting family relations in Japanese modernity. Often ending where they begin, these stories may appear circular; however, Donald Richie describes them as actually spiral, not content to close the circle, “often beginning a new if similar film in the final minutes” (Ozu, 161). Fittingly, Ozu is alternately interpreted as applying traditional Japanese aesthetics to modern film form (citing narrative ellipses and negative space in composition), and noted for his emulation of early Hollywood comedies (Tokyo Story is itself partially inspired by Leo McCarey’s 1937 Make Way for Tomorrow).



References and further reading:

Bordwell, D. (1988) Ozu and the Poetics of Cinema. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Desser, D. (ed.) (1997) Ozu’s Tokyo Story. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Nornes, A. M. (2007) “The Riddle of the Vase: Ozu Yasujiro’s Late Spring” in Japanese Cinema: Texts and Contexts, 78-89. New York: Routledge. Phillips, A. and Stringer, J. (ed.)

Ozu Y. and Noda K. (2003) Tokyo Story: The Ozu/Noda Screenplay. Berkeley: Stone Bridge Press. Richie, D. and Klestadt, E. (tr.)

Richie, D. (1974) Ozu, Berkeley: University of California Press.

Schrader, P. (1972) Transcendental Style in Film: Ozu, Bresson, Dreyer. Berkeley: University of California Press.

Yoshida K. (2003) Ozu’s Anti-Cinema. Ann Arbor: Center for Japanese Studies, The University of Michigan. Miyao D. and Hirano K. (tr.)



Joel Neville Anderson

PhD Student, Visual and Cultural Studies, University of Rochester



—



Paratextual material:



Tokyo monogatari (Tokyo Story, 1953) promotional photo, copyright Shochiku Co., Ltd. [https://www.dropbox.com/s/mzvrzhh0e7ks7nm/tokyo_story_cast.jpg]



Tokyo monogatari (Tokyo Story, 1953) trailer, copyright Shochiku Co., Ltd. [https://www.dropbox.com/s/ukv5n6ogx9bcsvf/tokyo_story_trailer.m4v]



Tokyo monogatari (Tokyo Story, 1953) clip [scene of Hara Setsuko giving tour to Ryu Chishu and Higashiyama Chieko in Tokyo, 37:30-45:45 in Criterion Collection release]

	2/2