Taylor & Francis – Encyclopedia of Modernism



About you

[Salutation]

Dagmar

[Middle name]

Vandenbosch



[Enter your biography]



[Enter the institution with which you are affiliated]



Your article

Unamuno y Jugo, Miguel de (1864—1936)

[Enter any variant forms of your headword – OPTIONAL]

Miguel de Unamuno is a Spanish writer and philosopher whose work includes essays, novels, poetry, drama, and journalism. He is considered to be one of the leading members of the Generation of 1898, a group of canonical writers championing the political and cultural regeneration of Spain in the early 20th Century. Recurrent themes in his oeuvre are the struggle between reason and faith, the question of mortality, and the search for identity (of both individuals and nations). His narrative oeuvre breaks away from the model of 19th Century realism by focusing on the inner life of the protagonist and introducing metafictional devices.  



Born in the Basque city of Bilbao, Unamuno studied at the Faculty of Arts and Philosophy of the University of Madrid. In 1891, he obtained the chair of Greek Philology at the University of Salamanca. Ten years later, he was appointed rector of this university. In 1924, Unamuno was banished for six years due to his opposition to the dictatorship of general Primo de Rivera. On his return in 1930, he welcomed the Second Republic but soon was disappointed by it. After the outbreak of the Civil War, he first supported the Francoist rebellion but ended up condemning it publicly shortly before his death.

Miguel de Unamuno is a Spanish writer and philosopher whose work includes essays, novels, poetry, drama, and journalism. He is considered to be one of the leading members of the Generation of 1898, a group of canonical writers championing the political and cultural regeneration of Spain in the early 20th Century. Recurrent themes in his oeuvre are the struggle between reason and faith, the question of mortality, and the search for identity (of both individuals and nations). His narrative oeuvre breaks away from the model of 19th Century realism by focusing on the inner life of the protagonist and introducing metafictional devices.  



File: Unamuno1.jpg

Figure 1 Miguel de Unamuno y Jugo

Source: http://www.biografiasyvidas.com/biografia/u/unamuno.htm





Born in the Basque city of Bilbao, Unamuno studied at the Faculty of Arts and Philosophy of the University of Madrid. In 1891, he obtained the chair of Greek Philology at the University of Salamanca. Ten years later, he was appointed rector of this university. In 1924, Unamuno was banished for six years due to his opposition to the dictatorship of general Primo de Rivera. On his return in 1930, he welcomed the Second Republic but soon was disappointed by it. After the outbreak of the Civil War, he first supported the Francoist rebellion but ended up condemning it publicly shortly before his death.

Unamuno’s most important essays address issues related to national and individual identity. In En torno al casticismo (translation, 1895) Unamuno sets out to define Spain’s uniqueness while stressing the importance of its relation to the European tradition. Later works, starting with Vida de Don Quijote y Sancho (1905), focus on the defence of Spanish character. Del sentimiento trágica de la vida (1913) shows a shift of interest to existential problems and doubts of the modern individual. The most suitable genre to treat these existential questions, according to the author, is the novel. In Amor y Pedagogía (1902) and later in Niebla (Mist) (1914), Unamuno refines his concept of the novel –ironically baptised ‘nivola’ instead of ‘novela’ [‘novel’]– as a narrative of the ‘inner reality’ of the character. Unamuno’s rejection of realism also implies an innovative use of metafiction: in Mist, for instance, the protagonist starts a dialogue with the author. San Manuel Bueno, mártir (1930), often considered Unamuno’s best novel, tackles the spiritual crisis of a priest who has come to doubt the existence of life after death but keeps up appearances so as not to prejudice the faith of his parishioners. In the last two decades, criticism has taken an increased interest in the discursive aspects of Unamuno’s narrative work (Vauthier, Zavala), while Unamuno’s plays and his poetry –which differ considerably from Spanish ‘modernismo’, e.g. in the use of rhyme– have received less critical attention. Unamuno’s philosophical versatility finds an echo in a literary style characterised by a strong taste for paradox, irony and neologisms.



Selected works

Novels

Amor y pedagogía (1902); Love and Pedagogy (1996, P. Lang)

Niebla (1914); Mist (1928, H. Fertig)

Abel Sánchez (1917); Abel Sanchez and Other Stories (1956; Regnery Publishing)

San Manuel Bueno, mártir (1930); San Manuel Bueno, Martyr (1973, University of North Carolina Press).



Essays

En torno al casticismo (1895) 

Vida de Don Quijote y Sancho (1905); The Life of Don Quixote and Sancho according to Miguel de Cervantes Saavedra (1927, A. A. Knopf)

El sentimiento trágico de la vida (1913); The Tragic Sense of Life (1972, Princeton UP)



Poetry

Poesías (1907)

El cristo de Velázquez (1920); The Christ of Velazquez (1951, Johns Hopkins)

Cancionero. Diario poético (1953)



Drama

Fedra (1910)

El otro (1920)

El hermano Juan (1934)

Further reading:



(Blanco Aguinaga)



(Ferrater Mora)



(Ilie)



(La Rubia Prado)



(Nozick)



(Ribas)



(Vauthier)



(Zavala)