

Unit One


Unit One was a group of painters, sculptors and architects, formed in
London in 1933 by the artist Paul Nash. Unit referred to the groups
unity of purpose, and One to each members individual style. Its unifying
aim was to reflect contemporary modernism, including Surrealism and
abstraction. The painters were John Armstrong, Edwin Burra, Tristram
Hillier and Paul Nash  all influenced by Surrealism  and the abstract
artists John Bigge, Ben Nicholson and Edward Wadsworth. The sculptors,
Barbara Hepworth and Henry Moore, were making bio-morphic forms, while the
architects Wells Coates and Colin Lucas were designing in a modernist
style. The group launched with a London exhibition in 1934 which then
toured provincially. A book, Unit One, edited by the art critic Herbert
Read, accompanied the exhibition and carried statements by all the groups
members. The exhibition and book generated intense public controversy about
the nature of modern art, although the group itself broke up in 1935 as a
result of differences between its members.

Nash originally painted landscapes, influenced by Cubism and Post-
Impressionism, but by 1930 was becoming dissatisfied with this approach. He
and Burra then visited Paris to study new developments in art, and on
returning to England, Nash organised an exhibition entitled Recent
Developments in British Painting. This included new work by Burra,
Nicholson, Bigge, Armstrong and Wadsworth who all then joined Unit One.
What was most significant for these artists was not the growing animosity
in Paris between abstraction and Surrealism, but that both movements were
modern in the sense of being contemporary cultural developments.

Nash and Read emphasised that Unit One was not concerned with the promotion
of any single theory or style. Read stated that it does not stand for any
new principle in art, while Nash acknowledged that the members individual
artistic beliefs varied. What brought them together, said Nash, was a
common concern for the expression of a truly contemporary spirit, for that
thing which is recognised as particularly of today. The implication was
that they considered much English art to be backward-looking or rooted in
provincial romanticism. Instead, the group embraced the modernist European
concept of a unity of approach between painting, sculpture and architecture
in the creation of art for the contemporary world.

While Nash emphasised this broad commonality of approach, the statements by
individual members and the visual character of their works differed widely.
Thus, while Wadsworth wrote dismissively in the Unit One book about
pictures deriving from the appearance of an attractive little bit of
Nature, Hepworth proclaimed that contemplation of Nature generated some
universal or abstract vision of beauty. Similarly, Bigge argued that the
new art should be characterised by precision, clarity and simplicity and
produced related abstract imagery, while Burras surrealist figurative
paintings were complex and loaded with luxuriance. Even among the
abstract artists there were important differences of approach, varying from
Nicholsons orthogonal, geometric reliefs to Wadsworths free-floating,
biomorphic forms. But, despite many differences, Unit One certainly met its
objectives of showcasing work then perceived as modern, as was demonstrated
by the extensive, if generally hostile, reception of its exhibition by much
of the media. Press accounts described some works in the exhibition as
meaningless, repulsive and even degenerative, while the critic Geoffrey
Grigson wrote of the groups disunion of styles.

Given the differences within the group  particularly between abstraction
and surrealism  it is not surprising that Unit One expired in 1935.
However, the interest it had generated resulted in other galleries
launching separate exhibitions of surrealist and abstract art; these were
developments in contemporary art in Britain for which Unit One had provided
an early platform.


References and further reading

Black, J. (2005) Edward Wadsworth, London: Phillip Wilson Publishers
Causey A.(1980) Paul Nash, Oxford: Oxford University Press
Checkland S.J. (2000) Ben Nicholson, the Vicious Circle of his Life and
Art, London:
         John Murray
Harrison C. (1981) English Art and Modernism, New Haven and London: Yale
          University Press
Read H. (1934), Unit One, London: Cassell and Co.
Remy M. (1999) Surrealism in Britain, Aldershot: Ashgate



Images
                     [pic]
          Paul Nash, Kinetic Feature, 1931, oil on canvas, 66 x 50.8 cms,
Tate

www.tate.org.uk/art/artworks/nash-kinetic-feature-t00734

                        [pic]
     Edward Burra, Dancing Skeletons, 1934, Gouache on paper, 78.7 x 55.9
cms, Tate.

www.tate.org.uk/art/artworks/burra-dancing-skeletons-n05005


[pic]
Ben Nicholson,  Relief, 1935, oil on wood, 54.5 x 80 cms., British Council

visualarts.britishcouncil.org/collection/artist/5/1773/object/43125


            [pic]
Edward Wadsworth, Dux et Comes 1, 1932, tempera on canvas, 50.8 x 61 cms.,
Tate

www,tate.org.ukart/artworks/wadsworth-dux-et-comes-I-t01124
