Taylor & Francis – Encyclopedia of Modernism



About you

[Salutation]

Rosa

[Middle name]

Berland



[Enter your biography]



[Enter the institution with which you are affiliated]



Your article

Urteaga, Mario Alvarado (1875 –1957)

[Enter any variant forms of your headword – OPTIONAL]

The self-taught painter Mario Alvarado Urteaga’s oeuvre includes 197 known drawings and paintings. Urteaga’s works often have a contemplative and dignified format that The Museum of Modern Art curator Lincoln Kirstein called ‘the poetry of the commonplace’.  In the 1920-30s, Urteaga had began to move away from neo-Renaissance religious subject matter and concentrated on the gravitas depiction of the Peruvian indigenous people including scenes of daily rural and village life, as well as religious and funerary processions. The oil painting Burial of an Illustrious Man, 1936, (Entierro de veteran) now in the collection of The Museum of Modern Art from the artist’s classical period (1930-39), depicts a burial in Cajamarca of a veteran of the Chilean-Peruvian War of 1879. It is one of five known paintings of funerary processions (Entierro en Cajamarca, 1923-34, Entierro, 1945; Entierro, 1946 and El Entierro de un hermano, date unknown) made by Urteaga. In Burial of an Illustrious Man, the artist takes traditional subject matter (a funeral procession) and reinterprets it in a classically informed style that depicts the native people of Peru with a somber dignity and traces of a social realism. Urteaga’s dignified portrayal of the Indigenous people of Peru influenced generations of national painters, and his work has come to symbolize a manifestation of indigenous pride. 

The self-taught painter Mario Alvarado Urteaga’s oeuvre includes 197 known drawings and paintings. Urteaga’s works often have a contemplative and dignified format that The Museum of Modern Art curator Lincoln Kirstein called ‘the poetry of the commonplace’.  In the 1920-30s, Urteaga had began to move away from neo-Renaissance religious subject matter and concentrated on the gravitas depiction of the Peruvian indigenous people including scenes of daily rural and village life, as well as religious and funerary processions. The oil painting Burial of an Illustrious Man, 1936, (Entierro de veteran) now in the collection of The Museum of Modern Art from the artist’s classical period (1930-39), depicts a burial in Cajamarca of a veteran of the Chilean-Peruvian War of 1879. It is one of five known paintings of funerary processions (Entierro en Cajamarca, 1923-34, Entierro, 1945; Entierro, 1946 and El Entierro de un hermano, date unknown) made by Urteaga. In Burial of an Illustrious Man, the artist takes traditional subject matter (a funeral procession) and reinterprets it in a classically informed style that depicts the native people of Peru with a somber dignity and traces of a social realism. Urteaga’s dignified portrayal of the Indigenous people of Peru influenced generations of national painters, and his work has come to symbolize a manifestation of indigenous pride. 



[File: Urteaga.jpg]



Figure 1 Mario Urteaga Alvarado. Burial of an Illustrious Man, 1936. Oil on canvas. The Museum of Modern Art, New York

http://www.scalarchives.com/web/ricerca_risultati.asp?SC_NDD=&ricerca_s=0124374&andor=and&andnot=&stockindexonline.com=1

Further reading:

 (Antonio de Lavalle and Lang)

(Barr)

(Bihalji-Merin)

(Buntinx, Wuffarden and Urteaga)

(Buntix, Urteaga and Wuffarden)

(Kirstein)

(Mackie)

(Raygada)

(Zevallos, Boceto biográfico del pintor Mario Urteaga)

(Zevallos, Tres pintores cajamarquinos : Mario Urteaga, José Sabogal, Camilo Blas)