Taylor & Francis – Encyclopedia of Modernism



About you

[Salutation]

Gloria

[Middle name]

Galindo



[Enter your biography]



[Enter the institution with which you are affiliated]



Your article

Vidas secas (Barren Lives)

[Enter any variant forms of your headword – OPTIONAL]

One of the most important films of Brazil’s Cinema Nôvo movement, Vidas secas was directed by Nelson Pereira dos Santos, and based on the 1938 novel of the same name written by Graciliano Ramos. It tells the story of a poverty-stricken family in the sertão—the dry Brazilian northeast lands—in the 1940s. Shot in a modernist style reminiscent of Italian neorealist film, Vidas secas is characterised by telling compositions, subjective shots, atomised, overexposed lighting and sparse dialogue.

One of the most important films of Brazil’s Cinema Nôvo movement, Vidas secas was directed by Nelson Pereira dos Santos, and based on the 1938 novel of the same name written by Graciliano Ramos. It tells the story of a poverty-stricken family in the sertão—the dry Brazilian northeast lands—in the 1940s. Shot in a modernist style reminiscent of Italian neorealist film, Vidas secas is characterised by telling compositions, subjective shots, atomised, overexposed lighting and sparse dialogue. Fabiano, the father, Sinhá (Mrs.) Vitória, the mother, their two sons, and their dog Baleia wander about the desolate land searching for a better place to live, but the drought and misery destroy their dreams of a more humane existence. Dos Santos shapes the family's struggle as blunt moments of survival pitted against the harsh landscape. For a while, Fabiano finds work as a cowhand, giving the family privileges to a tiny patch of land and a leather bed. However, a disagreement with a local policeman and merciless nature send the family back on the road. Made at a time of great political and social turmoil, just before the coup d'état of 1964 and the establishment of the military dictatorship in Brazil, it became one of the most representative films of Latin American cinema of the period. The film won the OCIC (International Catholic Organisation for Cinema) prize at Cannes Film Festival in 1964.

Further reading:

(Bernadet)



(Johnson and Stam)



(Johnson and Stam, Nelson Pereira dos Santos Vidas Secas)



(Johnson, Cinema Novo X5, Masters of Contemporary Brazilian Film)



(Price)



(Ramos)



(Rocha)



(Rocha, Revolução do Cinema Novo)



(Salem)



(Santos)