

Contributor:: Patricia Andrea Dosio

Vigo, Abraham
(Born Abraham Regino Vigo: 1893 - Montevideo, Uruguay; Died: 1957  -  Buenos
Aires, Argentina)

Abraham Regino Vigo was one of the most talent artists of the  first  avant-
garde in Buenos Aires. He was born in Montevideo, Uruguay, but  at  the  age
of twelve started working with his  father,  a  painter  and  decorator,  in
Buenos Aires. He studied painting in the Sociedad Estmulo de  Bellas  Artes
like his father. During his career, Vigo exhibited individually and  with  a
socially compromised group of artists, receiving several awards and  prizes.
Due to health problems, in 1939 he settled in  Mendoza  and  a  year  later,
became an  Argentine  citizen  and,  as  member  of  thte  Communist  Party,
announced his candidacy in provincial deputy race.  When  Vigo  returned  to
Buenos Aires,  he  worked  mostly  as  engraver.  His  articulation  between
artistic practice and political militancy represented  a  modernist  feature
in local art. More than any other medium, Vigo employed graphic  techniques,
such as woodcuts, etching and drawing. Most of his works were  illustrations
in magazines, newspapers and low price book editions. Engraving enables  the
circulation of the images not only in the context of written word  but  also
among popular audience. Vigos aimed at a clear  image,  reproducible,  easy
to read by workers and separated from the traditional art market.

By the 1920s, the anti-academic movement in  Buenos  Aires  was  divided  in
different aesthetics lines and ideological groups. In this context,  Abraham
Regino Vigo joined a group of artists and writers committed to the  struggle
against social injustice and the human  consequences  of  the  modernisation
process. The painters  and  sculptors  Vigo  met  were  Jos  Arato,  Adolfo
Bellocq, Guillermo Facio Hebequer, Santiago Palazzo and  Agustn  Riganelli.
They centred around a  socialist  publishing  house,  Claridad,  located  at
Boedo street, in the working-class suburbs of the city. Then the  group  was
known as Artistas del Pueblo (Artists of the People) or Grupo de  Boedo,  in
reference to the street of the publisher and the name of the  neighbourhood.
Group identity was a important feature for these artists, and  important  in
order for concrete a social art to question  the  established  authority  of
the local artistic field. The  arrabal  porteo  (suburban  slum  of  Buenos
Aires) and its typical characters were common topics  represented  by  Vigo.
The cover of the magazine Los Pensadores (The thinkers) entitled  Aqu  est
prohibido baarnos, (Here we are not allowed to swim), Vigo showed  excluded
people as seen from the privileges of upper-class  resort  in  a  simplified
realistic style and limited colour scheme.
In other works, Vigo developed an expressionistic realism aimed  at  raising
the consciousness of  the  workers,  showing  its  social  conditions  in  a
capitalist and modern society. Tierra (vampiros), (Earth (vampires)), is  an
example of this, making use of  a  subjective  and  distorting  perspective,
diagonal lines and stark angles, with a monochromatic palette.


[pic]
Abraham Vigo, El orador, (The speaker), 1933, etching, 9.84 x  8.66  inches,
Museo de Bellas Artes, La Plata.
http://www.buenosaires.gob.ar/areas/cultura/arteargentino/05ingles/01sigloxx
_en/03gr_28c.php

The artist was also a theatre designer and,  from  1927  onwards,  conceived
sets  for  independent  theatres,  such  as  Teatro  Experimental  de   Arte
(Experimental art theatre), Teatro  del  Pueblo  (Theatre  of  the  people),
Teatro Proletario (Proletarian theatre), and the company  of  Discpolo.  In
the sketches for the play Los sealados, (The marked ones),  by  the  writer
Elas  Castelnuovo,  Vigo  recreated  tense  and  strained  spaces   through
expressionistic resources, a characteristic of his scenic space  conception.

Besides the renovation of set design, the strong contribution  of  Vigo  was
his consideration of the art as a medium  of  social  inclusion,  accessible
for popular sectors and vehicle of working-class issues,  idea  shared  with
the other members of Artistas del  Pueblo.  The  artist  died  in  Banfield,
Great Buenos Aires, on July 27, 1957.


Further Reading:

Muoz, M. A. (2008) Los Artistas del Pueblo, 1920-1930. Buenos  Aires:  OSDE
Foundation.

Caffarena, A. (2007) Abraham Vigo: un artista del Pueblo, Desde Boedo,  n
66 [newspaper online]. Available at:
http://periodicodesdeboedo.blogspot.com.ar/2007_08_01_archive.html

Frank, P. (2006) Los Artistas del Pueblo. Prints  and  Workers  Culture  in
Buenos Aires, 1917-1935. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press.

Dosio, P.  A.  (2004)  Modernidad  y  vanguardia.  Buenos  Aires:  Ediciones
Cooperativas.

Pacheco, M. (1988) Reflexiones sobre la obra grabada de Adolfo Bellocq 1899-
1972. Una aproximacin a la accin del  grupo  de  Barracas.  Buenos  Aires:
Universidad de Buenos Aires, Facultad de Filosofa y Letras.

Castelnuovo,  E.  (1973)  Memorias.  Buenos  Aires:   Ediciones   Culturales
Argentina.
List of Works:
Abraham Vigo, sketch for the play Los sealados, (The  marked  ones),  1928,
gouache on cardboard, 13.38 x 19.29 inches, Sahda Vigo Collection.

Abraham Vigo, Aqu est prohibido baarnos, (Here  we  are  not  allowed  to
swim) 1925, original for magazine Los Pensadores n  4,  tempera  on  paper,
16.14 x 11.81 inches, CeDInCI Collection.

Abraham Vigo, Tierra (vampiros), (Earth (vampires)), 1936, etching, 11.02  x
14.96 inches, Ariel Vigo Collection.

Abraham Vigo, Fin de jornada, (End of working day),  1936,  oil  on  canvas,
47.24 x 39.37 inches,  Museo  de  Artes  Plsticas  Eduardo  Svori,  Buenos
Aires.

Abraham Vigo, El orador, (The speaker), 1933, etching, 9.84 x  8.66  inches,
Museo de Bellas Artes, La Plata.


