
Wang, Wenxing (Wang, Wen-hsing)   (1939)

Wang Wenxing is one of the most important fiction writers in the Chinese
language in modern times. His experimentation with the Chinese
languagepictography and syntax, narrative form, narrating
perspectivestogether with his exploration of existential themes
establishes him as a paramount figure in Taiwans literary modernism and
Chinese-language literature worldwide.

Born in Fuzhou, Fujian Province, China, Wang and his family moved to Taiwan
in 1946 and settled in a small city in southern Taiwan, Donggang. Two years
later the family moved to Taipei. Wang received his BA from the Foreign
Languages and Literatures Department in National Taiwan University. In 1958
Wang published his first short story Shou ye (The lingering night) and a
few more stories in the following two years. In 1960 Wang and several of
his classmates, including Bai Xianyong, Chen Ruoxi, Ouyan Ziall of whom
later became important writers in Taiwanfounded the journal Xiandai wenxue
(Modern literature), which nurtured Taiwans modernist movement in the
1960s. After receiving his BA in 1961, Wang served in the military, as was
required by law.  In 1963 he went to the University of Iowa and received an
MFA in creative writing. Two years later, Wang returned to Taiwan and began
his career as a writer, literary and film critic, and scholar teaching
English and American literature in his alma mater, National Taiwan
University. He retired from teaching at the rank of full professor in 2005.


Wang began writing his first novel, Jia bian (Family catastrophe), in 1966.
The novel took him seven years to complete. Family Catastrophe was first
published and serialized in Chungwai Literary Monthly in September 1972 and
was completed in February 1973. The book form was published by Hongfan
Bookstore in the following year. Immediately after its publication, Family
Catastrophe stirred up a controversy in Taiwan because of the novels
unconventional challenge of traditional Chinese notions of patriarchy and
family structure. Drawing materials from his personal life, Family
Catastrophe depicts the evolving relationship between the son and his
parents, particularly the father. As the son grew older, his childhood
admiration for his father and love for his family turned into disgust and
his treatment of the aging and senile father became increasingly abusive
and violent. One day the father quietly left the house in his pajamas. As
the son searched for the father, he usurped the fathers place in the
family. The seemingly lack of morality of the novel disturbed many of its
readers who also felt disoriented at the novels innovative form and
linguistic experimentation. This novel stands as an iconic modernist work
in the Chinese language.

Wang began to write his second novel Beihai de ren (Backed against the sea)
in 1974. The first volume of this novel was published in 1981 by Hongfan
Bookstore.

[pic]

The 1981 edition of Backed Against the Sea, vol. 1. The cover is a painting
by Wang himself.


The second volume was not completed until 1997. It was first published and
serialized in Lianhe wenxue (Unitas) from January to June, 1999. The book
form, published by Hongfan Bookstore, came out in September of the same
year. Backed Against the Sea continues Wangs modernist style and narrative
techniques and innovation with the Chinese language. The novel is a long
stream of consciousness and interior monologue of a handicapped and
diseased retired soldier whose downtrodden predicaments, along with petty
characters of similar situations, give expression to Wangs existential
views on life and religious faith as well as his skepticism of modernity.
Backed Against the Sea is an absurdist comedy of the human condition.

[pic]

The writers prison cell, as Wang calls the small space in which he
writes.



Although Wang published only two novels, both are hailed as among the most
important and innovative literary works in the Chinese language. He crafts
his words in the most meticulous way possible. A true wordsmith, it is said
that Wang only writes thirty-five words a day.  In 2000, Wang donated the
manuscripts of Family Catastrophe and Backed Against the Sea, along with
notes and letters, to National Taiwan University Library.

[pic]

 Wang only writes on scraps of paper as he crafts his words.





Chronology of All Works:

Short Story Collections

Longtian lou (Dragon inn) (1967).
   A collection of short stories on the civil war between the Nationalist
Party and the Communist Party (1946-1949) and the post-1949 period in
Taiwan

Wanju shouqiang (The toy revolver) (1970).
   A collection of novellas and sketches

Shiwupian xiaoshuo (Fifteen short stories) (1981).

Novels

Jia bian (Family catastrophe) (1974).

Beihai de ren (Backed against the sea), vol. 1 (1981) and vol. 2 (1999).
  A two-volume novel on the life of a former soldier who chooses to live in
an      impoverished fishing village in order to have minimum contact with
the society.
Essay Collections

Shu he ying (Books and films) (1988).
   A collection of critical essays on literature and film.

Xiaoshuo yu mo (Beyond fiction) (2002).
   Miscellaneous writings.

Xingyulou suixiang (Random thoughts from the star-rain tower) (2003).
   Reflections on religious faith, theology, aesthetics, and philosophy.
Plays

M he W (M and W) (1988).
   A play in the style of the theater of the absurd, exploring the question
of trust
   between people.


Works Available in English:

 Family Catastrophe, translated by Susan Wan Dolling. Honolulu: University
of Hawaii
   Press, 1995.

Backed against the Sea, translated by Edward Gunn. Ithaca, N.Y.: East Asia

   Program,Cornell University, 1993.


References and Further Reading:

Endless War: Fiction and Essays by Wang Wen-hsing. Eds. by Shu-ning Sciban
and Fred
   Edwards. Ithaca, NY: Cornell East Asian Program, Cornell University,
2011.
   This volume consists of a wide range of Wangs writings, apart from his
novels.

Chang, Yvonne Sung-Sheng. Language, Narrative and Stream of Consciousness:
The
   two novels of Wang Wen-hsing. Modern Chinese Literature 1, 1 (1984): 43-
56.
  A helpful guide to Wangs narrative techniques and experimentation with
language.

-----. Wang Wenxings Backed Against the Sea, Parts I and II: The Meaning
of
   Modernism in Taiwans Contemporary Literature. In David Wang and Carlos
Rojas
   eds., Writing Taiwan: A New Literary History. Durham, NC: Duke UP, 2006,
156-79.
   This article examines Wangs novel Back Against the Sea in the context
of Taiwans literary
   modernism.

Lupke, Christopher. Wang Wenxing and the Loss of China. Boundary 2.
Special
   Issue, ed. Rey Chow. 25, 2 (Fall 1998): 97-128.
   This article discusses and analyzes Family Catastrophe against the
historical backdrop
   of the Nationalists anti-mainland rhetoric during the Cold War..


