Taylor & Francis – Encyclopedia of Modernism



About you

[Salutation]

Jana

[Middle name]

Millar Usiskin



[Enter your biography]



University of Victoria



Your article

Watson, Sheila (1909-1998)

[Enter any variant forms of your headword – OPTIONAL]

Canadian writer Sheila Watson (1909-1998) is best known for her modernist novel The Double Hook (1959) about the redemptive struggles of a small, rural community as they deal with the murder of one of their members. Born Sheila Martin Doherty in New Westminster, B.C., Watson received her B.A., Honours in English (1931) and M.A. (1933) from the University of British Columbia. She taught elementary students in a number of rural schools in British Columbia before marrying Wilfred Watson in 1941. She then continued to teach in Toronto, in Vancouver at the University of British Columbia, and in Powell River, B.C. While living in Calgary during 1951-52, Watson completed The Double Hook, which was published to mixed reviews. After its publication, Watson began her PhD under he guidance of Marshall McLuhan at the University of Toronto and completed her dissertation Wyndham Lewis: Post Expressionist at the University of Alberta in 1961. While working as a professor at the University of Alberta, Watson continued to write and publish. She maintained correspondence with several Canadian scholars and writers, including Michael Ondaatje, George Bowering, and Daphne Marlatt. After her retirement in 1980, Sheila and her husband moved to Nanaimo B.C., where they died in 1998.

File: watson1.jpg



Canadian writer Sheila Watson (1909-1998) is best known for her modernist novel The Double Hook (1959) about the redemptive struggles of a small, rural community as they deal with the murder of one of their members. 



Born Sheila Martin Doherty in New Westminster, B.C., Watson received her B.A., Honours in English (1931) and M.A. (1933) from the University of British Columbia. She taught elementary students in a number of rural schools in British Columbia before marrying Wilfred Watson in 1941. She then continued to teach in Toronto, in Vancouver at the University of British Columbia, and in Powell River, B.C. While living in Calgary during 1951-52, Watson completed The Double Hook, which was published to mixed reviews. After its publication, Watson began her PhD under he guidance of Marshall McLuhan at the University of Toronto and completed her dissertation Wyndham Lewis: Post Expressionist at the University of Alberta in 1961. While working as a professor at the University of Alberta, Watson continued to write and publish. She maintained correspondence with several Canadian scholars and writers, including Michael Ondaatje, George Bowering, and Daphne Marlatt. After her retirement in 1980, Sheila and her husband moved to Nanaimo B.C., where they died in 1998.



While The Double Hook was partly based on her experiences teaching in the Cariboo District of British Columbia (1934-1936), in the novel Watson creates a community disconnected from any obvious Canadian context or history. Indeed, the characters in The Double Hook seem ultimately to be defined by their relationships with each other, rather than by a history of national or racial origin. Watson's interest in writers like Samuel Beckett, T. S. Eliot, Ezra Pound, and Wyndham Lewis has been well documented. Her vision of an alienated world; nostalgia for a primitive tradition; and use of symbolism, fragmentation, and imagery all connect the work to a Eurocentric form of modernism. While the influence of these formal elements on her work is apparent, also striking are the ways Watson adapts these for a distinctly Canadian audience (e.g., her use of First Nations imagery).



Watson was instrumental in establishing the arts periodical White Pelican (1971-76) along with Douglas Barbour, Stephen Scobie, John Orrell, Dorothy Livesay, and Norman Yates. She published her collection Four Stories in 1979, and another story (‘And the Four Animals’) was added for the publication of Five Stories in 1984. This was followed by the publication of Deep Hollow Creek, which had been written in the 1930s but left unpublished until 1992. While The Double Hook removes the self from Watson's portrayal of the Cariboo District, Deep Hollow Creek is noted for its realism and more faithful description of Watson's experiences in the region.



Scholarship on Watson has focused on diverse aspects of her work. Critics have discussed the ethical implications of her portrayals of First Nations characters and imagery. Likewise, the relationship between Watson's characters and the landscape is often considered with respect to national and historical land claim issues. In consideration of Watson's relationship with noted media critic Marshall McLuhan, critics have also focused on the impact of modernity and technology on the configuration of community in Watson's work. Watson's writing, especially in the short stories, also invites psychoanalytic approaches and gender critique.



List of Works:

Books

The Double Hook (1959)

 Sous l’oeil de coyote (trans. of The Double Hook by Arlette Francière, 1976)

Four Stories (1979)

Five Stories (1984)

Deep Hollow Creek (1992)



Edited Books

Habits and Hangups (Study Guide for Modern Consciousness course) (written and edited with Mary Hamilton, 1979)

The Collected Poems of Miriam Mandel (editor, 1984)

‘Brother Oedipus’ Queen’s Quarterly (Summer 1954)

‘The Black Farm’ Queen’s Quarterly (Summer 1956)

‘Antigone’ The Tamarack Review (Spring 1959)

‘The Rumble Seat’ Open Letter 3.1 (1975)



Essays

‘A Question of Portraiture’ in The Tamarack Review (Autumn 1963)

‘The Great War: Wyndham Lewis and the Underground Press’ in arts/canada (Winter 1965)

‘Canada and Wyndham Lewis the Artist’ in Canadian Literature (Winter 1968)

‘Artist Ape as Crowd-master’ in Explorations Ed. Marshall McLuhan, sup. The Varsity Graduate (May 1964).

‘Myth and Counter-myth’ in White Pelican (Winter 1974)

‘Swift and Ovid: The Development of Metasatire’ in The Humanities Association Bulletin (Spring 1967)

‘Power: Nude or Naked.’ in Explorations Ed. Marshall McLuhan, sup. The Varsity Graduate (December 1965)

‘Michael Ondaatje: The Mechanization of Death’ in White Pelican (Fall 1972)

‘Gertrude Stein: The Style is the Machine’ in White Pelican (Autumn 1973)

‘What I'm Going to Do’ in Open Letter 3.1 (1975)



Link: http://www.newestpress.com/authors/Podcasts/Watson_discussion.mp3

1 Audio Clip: This clip includes Cathy Brown's readings from The Double Hook and commentary by Professor Misao Dean.

Further reading:

(Betts)



(Bowering)



(Flahiff)



(Goldman)



(Lovesey)



(Morriss, 'No Short Cuts': The Evolution of The Double Hook)



(Morriss, The Elements Transcended)



(St. Onge)



(Willmott)