
Webb, Beatrice (1858-1953) and Sidney (1859-1947)
Beatrice and Sidney Webb were leading intellectual advocates of socialist
reform in England. Beatrice Webb (ne Potter) was born into a wealthy
family, but her early experience as a researcher studying poverty in London
with Charles Booth (1840-1916) confirmed her commitment to sociology and
socialist values. Sidney Webb was from a lower middle-class family and
entered civil service as a progressive member of the London County Council
just before the two married in 1892. The Webbs advocated for a transition
from capitalism to socialism through evolution rather than revolution, and
believed that this was best achieved using scientific approaches to the
study of social problems. Rejecting Marxist formulations of class struggle
until late in their lives, the Webbs were associated with the Fabian
Society, established in 1884, which advocated moderate, anti-Marxist
socialism. The first of many collaborative efforts, the Webbs produced
their authoritative History of Trade Unionism in 1894, and next co-founded
the London School of Economics (LSE) in 1895, with a central mandate of
research and instruction in sociology. Although Sidney Webb eventually
accepted a peerage, becoming Baron Passfield, Beatrice Webb never adopted
the title of Lady Passfield, using the opportunity to undermine British
investments in rank.
Kate Atkinson, Ryerson University

List of works
Webb, B. (1948) Our Partnership, B. Drake and M. Cole, eds., London:
Longmans, Green and Co.
Webb, S. and Webb, B. (1911) The History of Trade Unionism, London:
Longmans, Green and Co.
------ (1920) A Constitution for the Socialist Commonwealth of Great
Britain, London: Longmans, Green and Co.

References and further reading
Beilharz, P. and Nyland, C., (eds.) (1998) The Webbs, Fabianism and
Feminism: Fabianism and the Political Economy of Everyday Life, Brookfield:
Ashgate.
Harrison, R. J. (2000) The Life and Times of Sidney and Beatrice Webb: 1858-
1905, the Formative Years, New York: St. Martins Press.
Romano, M. A. (1998) Beatrice Webb (1858-1943): The Socialist with a
Sociological Imagination, Queenston: The Edwin Mellen Press.

Paratextual Material
Webb Collection at LSE, including Beatrices diaries archived online and
several photographs: <http://digital.library.lse.ac.uk/collections/webb>.
Permissions: No material may be published without the prior permission of
both the copyright holder and the Library. All applications for publication
must be made to the Archivist in the first instance, but responsibility for
ensuring copyright clearance rests with the user.
(<http://archives.lse.ac.uk/Record.aspx?id=PASSFIELD>)

