Taylor & Francis – Encyclopedia of Modernism



About you

[Salutation]

Charlotte

[Middle name]

Galloway



[Enter your biography]



Australian National University



Your article

Wee, Beng Chong (1938--)

[Enter any variant forms of your headword – OPTIONAL]

Wee Beng Chong is a Singaporean artist known for his work in both painting and sculpture.  Trained at the Nanyang Academy of Fine Arts, Singapore, and L’Ecole Nationale Superieure des Beaux-Arts in Paris, Wee’s art practice explores both Western and traditional Chinese art styles.  Prior to studying in Paris, Wee was a founding member of the Modern Art Society, an organisation started in 1964 that did much to promote public understanding of contemporary art in Singapore. On his return to Singapore, Wee helped popularise sculpture in the early 1970s at a time when few Singaporean artists were working seriously in the medium. His work ranges from realism to abstraction, and he often composes works in mixed-media. Additionally, Wee is a practitioner of Chinese traditional ink painting, calligraphy, and seal engraving. In 1979 Wee received the Cultural Medallion for Artistic Excellence from the Singapore Ministry of Culture. He is active in many arts organisations and was head of the Fine Art Department at the Nanyang Academy of Fine Arts (1982-89), where he is currently a senior teaching fellow. Wee’s works have been featured in many major exhibitions of Singapore art, and he is well represented in public collections. 

Wee Beng Chong is a Singaporean artist known for his work in both painting and sculpture.  Trained at the Nanyang Academy of Fine Arts, Singapore, and L’Ecole Nationale Superieure des Beaux-Arts in Paris, Wee’s art practice explores both Western and traditional Chinese art styles.  Prior to studying in Paris, Wee was a founding member of the Modern Art Society, an organisation started in 1964 that did much to promote public understanding of contemporary art in Singapore. On his return to Singapore, Wee helped popularise sculpture in the early 1970s at a time when few Singaporean artists were working seriously in the medium. His work ranges from realism to abstraction, and he often composes works in mixed-media. Additionally, Wee is a practitioner of Chinese traditional ink painting, calligraphy, and seal engraving. In 1979 Wee received the Cultural Medallion for Artistic Excellence from the Singapore Ministry of Culture. He is active in many arts organisations and was head of the Fine Art Department at the Nanyang Academy of Fine Arts (1982-89), where he is currently a senior teaching fellow. Wee’s works have been featured in many major exhibitions of Singapore art, and he is well represented in public collections. 

Further reading:

(The Business Times)



 (Chia and Sabapathy)



(Chow)



(Sabathy)