
Ernst Widmer

Paulo Costa Lima

(Aarau, April 25, 1927, January 03, 1990). Ernst Widmer  considered  himself
a Brazilian citizen, a Brazilian composer  who  was  born  and  educated  in
Switzerland but who bloomed in the  tropics.  Actually,  the  theme  of  the
cultural crossing was of great importance for the elaboration of his way  of
thinking and of composing. He dedicated almost all his entire  life  to  the
School of Music of the Federal University of Bahia (UFBA), where  he  taught
between 1956 and 1987. During  that  period,  he  had  a  decisive  role  in
turning Salvador into one of the  most  important  centers  of  contemporary
music in Brazil. In particular,  he  was  in  charge  of  the  formation  of
composers,  making  this  activity  the  basis  for  his  intense   artistic
performance, which resulted in the composition of about two  hundred  opuses
and thirty-one awards. He  exerted  great  influence  on  his  students  and
several of them became well known composers, and he also gave extreme  value
to singularity as a pedagogical parameter, having inspired the  creation  of
the Group of Composers from Bahia in 1966, which manifest of just  one  line
rejected as a principle any declared principles.  After  his  retirement  in
1987, he renewed his ties with his  native  city  in  Switzerland,  debuting
several of his pieces and participating in the creation of the Ernst  Widmer
Gesellschaft dedicated to promoting his music.

He studied at the Zurich  Conservatory  with  Burkhard,  Frey  and  Hoerler,
graduating in composition, piano and musical education in  1950.  Burkhards
refusal to think only about  contemporary  times  had  a  strong  impact  on
Widmer, making him fascinated by the  great  lines  of  musical  elaboration
along the centuries, exactly as it was illustrated  in  his  writings  about
the diversity of cadences, the false relationships and  the  dialectic  game
between bordo and bordadura He dealt with all these themes  less  as  a
musicologist  than  as  a  composer,  registering  creation   possibilities,
opening the way for a series of musical experiments willing  to  treat  with
equal interest archaic themes and contemporary ones, as if  progressive  and
regressive phases were inherent to the act of composing.

From 1956 on, after some professional experience as a  private  teacher  and
chorus maestro, he moved to  Salvador  answering  an  invitation  from  Hans
Joachim Koellreutter, the director of the Seminrios  Livres  de  Msica  of
the Federal University of Bahia (Free Music Seminars). He  worked  at  first
as a theory teacher and maestro of  the  Madrigal  (1958-1967),  taking  the
group to an important tour in the United States in 1965.  When  Koellreutter
left Bahia, Widmer took up  the  teaching  of  composition  (1963)  and  the
academic leadership, having been Director of the School of Music and  Scenic
Arts several times (1963-65, 1967-69,  1976-80),  Extension  Coordinator  of
UFBA (1980-84) and member of the Culture Council of the State of Bahia.

It  is  possible  to  visualize  a  synthesis  of  Ernst  Widmers  creation
processes taking into consideration the  two  principles  enunciated  by  he
himself in 1988: the laws of organicity and relativity. The  former  regards
the logic of the organic growth of ideas, always  fertilized  by  criticism.
The latter is based on the relativity of things, on the  admission  that  it
is useless to choose between  this  or  that,  cultivating  therefore  the
possibility of inclusiveness  this and that.  Organicity  and  relativity
survive as far-reaching directions of synthesis, starting from  an  internal
movement  of  complementarity  and  sometimes  even  of   contradiction   or
antagonism. It is not difficult to  relate  this  way  of  thinking  to  the
composers trajectory, in the modulation between Germanic  culture  and  the
Brazilian one. However, this form of behaving must not  be  confounded  with
eclecticism, as it has been described some times, because it does  not  mean
accommodating distinct things  in  the  same  discourse,  but  systematizing
possible dialogues  among  distinct  perspectives,  sometimes  incompatible;
therefore the interest for the  idea  of  paradox  and  for  something  that
Widmer usually referred as heterodoxy.

A good example  of  this  distinction  can  be  found  in  the  adoption  of
octatonic strategies, a compositional choice that became  very  frequent  in
his last decade of creation, as for example, in the Sonata  Monte  Pascoal
op.  122  for  piano  solo  (1980)  In  this  opus,  the  sonata   form   is
reinterpreted starting from  the structural  possibilities  offered  by  the
combination of octatonic scales as a  reference  plan,  generating  motivic-
melodic and harmonic solutions, which  are  able  to  establish  contrasting
tonal areas and other indicators of form.

Conceived as a means of increasing  flexibility,  the  octatonic  strategies
developed by Widmer operate a dynamic interaction between the most  explicit
level of choices  the surface    and  the  level  of  the  principles  and
anticipations elaborated as a support for these  choices    the  structure.
Thus, many distinct contexts can be evoked  and  juxtaposed  in  dialogue  
Northeastern  traditions,  romanticism  and  post-romanticism,  nationalism,
free atonality, strict serialism, indeterminacy, clusters   without  losing
the sense  of  internal  coherence.  This  great  challenge  of  building  a
systematic basis capable of allowing for an unusual diversity, leads  us  to
a significant interpretation between the act of composing as an  elaboration
of references and composing  as  experimentation  with  sonorities,  between
reference and absolute music.

From the point of view of Brazilian modernism, Widmers ideas dialogue  with
the anthropophagic notion proposed by Oswald Andrade, but taking Bahia as  a
reference scenario, as a differentiated cultural place,  where  mixture  and
hybrid aspects were the  norm  for  many  centuries.  This  tension  between
multiple perspectives that, in spite of  differences,  maintain  a  bind  of
organization, can very well be understood as a reflex  of  Bahias  cultural
environment,  and  at  the  same  time  as  the   result   of   a   cultural
interpretation  elaborated  by  a  foreigners  vision,  one  who  gradually
becomes a native.  And  it  is  just  this  radical  interpretation  between
cultural experience and composing strategies  that  permits  to  assert  the
central role of culture, of cultural crossing, in Widmers work.

Creative Construction Directions

One can identify in his opus several  directions  of  creative  construction
and a permanent search for  sophistication  and  subtlety,  involving  pitch
structure,  rhythmic  mobility,  but  also  the  conceptions  of  form   and
orchestration. Some  of  these  directions,  which,  by  the  way,  are  not
stagnant, include:  1)  motivic,  serial  and  octatonic  constructions;  2)
referentialism; 3) experimentation with sonority and new notations.  All  of
them of innovative character, stressing the value of composing  as  a  field
of experimentation.

The organic growth  of  musical  ideas  has  a  significant  impact  on  the
organization  of  pitch,  both  in  motivic  formations  and  in  serial  or
octatonic strategies, as mentioned  above.  The  processes  of  melodic  and
motivic elaboration are supported by the relatively constant use  of  themes
constructed over cells of the type (014 minor third plus major  second)  and
(025 minor third plus major second), It is in general, through  these  units
and sets derived from  there,  that  many  works  are  structured,  and  the
octatonic phase (basically the last  decade  of  his  life)  being  a  clear
development of this process, since the octatonic scale  can  be  counted  as
one of the complex sets derived from the two cells.

These procedures, which  were  present  in  Widmers  production  since  the
fifties gave origin to a range of distinct formats  along  the  decades,  in
tonal,  modal,  free  atonal,  serial  or  octatonic  environments.   Serial
structures assemblages can be easily found,  for  example,  in  such  opuses
like Sinopse op.64 (1970) that already starts  from  the  aggregate,  Trgua
op. 93 for flute (1976), Vrtice op. 112 for piano solo  (1978),  Ignis  op.
102 for mixed ensembles, with its game of series in a mirror,  Sertania  op.
138, in the  third  movement,  as  part  of  the  octatonic  process  or  in
Cosmofonia II op. 162  for  cello  solo  (1987).  What  one  can  see  is  a
plasticity of the procedures that go from the work with small  sets  to  the
work with octatonic or serial strategies, thus confirming the  interest  for
the interplay between organicity and inclusiveness or relativity.  Actually,
the choice of proper sets, scales or  series  is  less  important  than  the
procedures in which they are involved and that sustain them.

The awareness of the close relationship between composition and  culture  is
part of Widmers work, and illustrates the importance  of  using  references
as part of the process of composing. The presence of materials arising  from
Brazilian cultures constituted one of those strategies,  although  there  is
constant care in placing these materials  in  perspective,  preventing  that
they function as a mere celebration of nationalism. Such is the case of  his
first systematic incursion in this direction,  the  Divertimento  II  (Cco)
op.22 (1961) for mixed ensemble,  written  even  before  he  began  teaching
composition, and that, in a  certain  way,  anticipates  the  ideal  of  the
Grupo de Compositores da Bahia. And also the Cinco Quidlibets op.  42  for
coro a cappella (1966), which presents material from the Brazilian  folklore
and  reaches  the  perspective  of   detachment   through   the   strategies
characteristic of this composition gender. Or during his full  maturity  his
first symphony Sertania  (Sinfonia  do  Serto)  op.  138,  which  builds  a
complex sonorous kaleidoscopic, taking  the  hero  from  the  northeast  (o
vaqueiro) as a conducting line. The piece also worked as a sound track  for
the cartoon Boi Aru by moviemaker Chico Liberato. The Sinfonia II  op.  139
is dedicated to the melodic and cultural richness of the margins of the  So
Francisco River. On the other hand, Sinfonia III op. 145 (1984)  draws  snow
peaks around Swiss lakes. The composer transports to  his  own  native  land
the look of strangeness and  cultural  bewilderment  that  he  exercised  in
Brazil.

It would also be possible to indicate a group of opuses where  the  cultural
chock itself assumes the main scene, transforms  itself  in  the  conducting
line of the compositional narrative. This is the case of the piece Die  vier
Jahrestraumzeitem op. 129 (1981) for two flutes and string  orchestra,  that
takes up the difference and even inconsistency   of  seasons  between  north
and south as a reference narrative. They are seasons of life and seasons  of
dream, in full paradox. For the composer spring means awakening and  sorrow,
summer zenith and  warm  rain,  fall,  maturity  and  impetus,  and  winter,
reflection and sunny snowy hillsides.  Also in  Utopia  op.  142  for  mixed
ensemble (1983), the encounter of vanguard sonorities  and  sonorities  from
Africa is celebrated, especially through the use of the xqur,  reaching
one of the highest points of his creative capacity. Following this  line  of
elaboration, we come to the piece De canto em canto II   Possvel  resposta
op. 169 (1988), which pictures the encounter of a symphonic  orchestra  with
the Afox Filhos de  Gandhi,  (one  of  the  most  famous  afro-descendent
Carnival groups from Bahia). It is certainly a possible  answer  to  Charles
Ivess  unanswered  question,  and  Widmers   proposal   is   that   Ivess
metaphysics should meet with the  trumpets  and  the  African  rhythms  from
Bahia, something that  maybe  could  be  described  as  a  dialogue  between
Descartes and Xang.

The work in the referential line includes dialogues with elements  from  the
past of occidental music, and it is worth remembering the Relax-Requiem  op.
100 (1978) that revolves around  one  of  J.S.  Bachs  chorales,  Variaes
sobre 2 danas de H. Neusidler op. 98 (1976), both for  mixed  ensemble,  of
Trilemma op. 80 (1973) for vocal  sextet  and  with  references  taken  from
Palestrinas  music,  besides  the  opuses  from  the   beginning   of   his
production, the Homage to F. Martin, Bartok and Stravinsky op.  18  and  18a
for oboe and orchestra both in 1959.

The vast production of opuses in constant interweaving  with  literature  is
also extraordinary.  Exponents  of  modernistic  Brazilian  poetry  received
differentiated attention, like Carlos Drummond de Andrade,  Jorge  de  Lima,
Oswald  de  Andrade,  Joo  Cabral  de  Melo  Neto  and  Bahia-born  Antonio
Brasileiro. Almost half of Widmers opuses are of compositions about  poetic
or  religious  texts.  Also  in  this  direction,  we  should  mention   his
experiences  with  music  theater,  and  with   the   handling   of   scenic
constructions. The play Dois retratos op. 133 (1982) for  soprano  and  four
percussionists and text from Gregrio de Mattos,  a  Bahian  poet  from  the
seventeenth century, represents one of  Widmers  brilliant  moments,  where
humor, logics and sonorous impact play roles of great importance.

The sixties watched a decisive  rapprochement  between  Widmers  music  and
experimentation horizons with timbres and  textures  besides  new  forms  of
notation. In the beginning of the decade, the opus for coro a cappela  A-v-e
M-a-r-i-a op. 34 explores the fragmentation of the text  and  the  world  of
sonorities thus created  in  spite  of  the  apparent  harmonic  immobility.
Bhague (1979) registers the important role of the new  timbre  combinations
(generally in chromatic clusters) in the opus Sinopse op. 64 for  orchestra,
chorus and soloists (1970). In Rumos op. 72 (1972) the  use  of  instruments
created by composer Walter Smetak guarantees a special  colorfulness  amidst
the symphonic orchestra. The  pieces  Pulsars  op.  62  for  mixed  ensemble
(1969)  and  Quasars  op.  69  for  orchestra  (1970)  also   reflect   this
orientation, besides the Quarteto III op. 78  (Convergence)  of  1973.  Also
from this time, the beginning of a new significant  approach  regarding  the
indetermination procedures and random processes.   In  Rondo  Mbile  (1968)
for piano  solo,  the  interpreter  can  choose  the  sequence  of  internal
sections. In Suave mari magno  op 97 (1975) the timbre exploration  of  the
piano heads for the construction of a  specific  graph  and  for  a  greater
participation of the interpreter. Pulsars op. 62 (1969) alternates  the  use
of graphic and traditional notation.


Ernst Widmers writings

From the sixties on, when he elaborated his first thesis dedicated  to  the
interaction of drones  and  neighbor-notes  as  formative  elements  of  the
western  tradition  (Bordo  e  Bordadura  ,  Widmer  1971a),  he  begins
publishing a series of papers and books on several areas of music  creation.
He writes about the  teaching  of  music  in  conservatories  (1971),  about
contemporary music didactics, about graphs and  new  notations  (1972),  the
problems of cultural propagation (1979), esthetics  (1981b),  criticism  and
creativity (1981), about Dorival Caymmi (1994)  and  Walter  Smetak  (1984),
about the Brazilian composers situation (1985),  about  the  marginalia  of
the Western  music  in  the  last  millennium  III  (1988a)  and  about  the
formation of contemporary composers (1988). It is a frame  of  thought  that
dialogues both with the practice of composing and the formation  process  in
composition.


REFERENCES

Bhague, Gerard
1979 Music in Latin America: An Introduction. Englewood Cliffs:  Prentice
Hall.

1980 Ernst Widmer. In The New Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians.
Edited by Stanley Sadie, vol. 20. London: Macmillan, 39798.

Compositores da Bahia & Msica Experimental
1966 Boletim. Publication of the Universidade Federal de Bahia (UFBA), no.
1. Salvador: UFBA.

Grupo de Compositores da Bahia
1967 Boletim. Publication of the Federal University of Bahia no. 1.
Salvador: Federal University of Bahia (UFBA), 15 pp.

1968 Boletim. Publication of the Federal University of Bahia, no.2.
Salvador: the Federal University of Bahia (UFBA), 19 pp.

19681969 Boletim. Publication of the Federal University of Bahia. No. 3.
Salvador: Federal  University of Bahia (UFBA),  22 pp.

19691970 Boletim. Publication of the Federal University of Bahia.
No. 4. Salvador: Federal University of Bahia (UFBA), 18 pp.

19701971 Boletim. Publication of the Federal University of Bahia. Nos.
56. Salvador: Federal University of Bahia (UFBA), 22 pp.

Lima, Paulo Costa
1996 Reflexes sobre o campo do conhecimento composicional, In Anais do
VIII Encontro Nacional da ANPPOM (AssociaoNacional de Pesquisa e Pos-
Graduao em Msica), Joo Pessoa, 1822 August 1995. Anais . . . S.1.
[http://www.musica.
ufmg.br/anppom/anais8/comp.htm], p. 1321.

1999 Ernst Widmer e o ensino de composio musical na Bahia. Salvador:
Copene-Fazcultura, 358 pp.

2000 Entre superfcie e estrutura: As estratgias octatnicas de Ernst
Widmer. Ph.D. Diss., School of Communication and Art, University of So
Paulo (USP).

Nogueira, Ilza Costa
1997 Ernst Widmer: Perfil estilstico. Salvador: Federal University of
Bahia (UFBA), 198 pp.

2009 Ernst Widmer: Catlogo de Obras (Web) , Marcos Histricos da
Composio Contempornea na UFBA,
http://www.mhccufba.ufba.br/SISMHCC/arquivos/catalogos/ew_parc.pdf

Widmer, Ernst
1971a Bordo e Bordadura. Unpublished manuscript written for the School of
Music and Art, Federal University of Bahia (UFBA), 18 pp.

1971b O ensino da msica nos conservatrios, UniversitasRevista de
Cultura da Universidade Federal da Bahia, Salvador, v. 8: 17585.

1972a ENTROncamentos SONoros: Ensaio a uma didtica da msica
contempornea. Unpublished manuscript written for School of Music and Art
(EMAC). Salvador: Federal University of Bahia (UFBA), 11 pp.

1972b Grafia e prtica sonora: Perspectivas didticas da atual grafia
musical na composio e na prtica interpretativa, In International
Symposia on the Problematics of Current Graphic Music, August, Roma. Anais
. . . Roma: Instituto talo-Latino- Americano, 13563

1979 Problemas da difuso cultural, Cadernos de Difuso Culturalda UFBA,
Salvador, n. 5, 76 pp.

1980 Skizze eines Selbsportrts unter verschiedenen Gesichtspunkten.
Unpublished paper. Chardonne 7 pp.

1981a Crtica e criatividade. Paper presented at the 33rd Annual Conference
of the SBPC in a Symposium About University and Reality: The Role of the
Critic. Salvador. 5 pp.

1981b Tema e Variaes, Jornal da Universidade Federal da Bahia (UFBA),
Salvador, n. 12.

1981c Tentativa de refletir e denunciar sobre 12 maneiras equivocadas de
encarar-se arte . . . Art. Revista da Escola de Msica e Artes Cnicas da
UFBA, Salvador, n. 1, (AprilJune): 39.

1984a Anton Walter Smetak, Art. Revista da Escola de Msica e Artes
Cnicas da UFBA, Salvador, n. 10 (April): 57.

1984b Clusulas e cadncias, Art. Revista da Escola de Msica e Artes
Cnicas da UFBA, Salvador, n. 11 (August): 544.

1985 Travos e favos, Art. Revista da Escola de Msica e Artes Cnicas da
UFBA, Salvador, n. 13 (April): 6371.

1987 Em busca de incertezas. Entrevista concedida a Marcus Gusmo. Paper
presented at the Symphonic Concert of Bahia at the Commemoration of the
Sixtieth Birthday of Ernst Widmer. Salvador, Castro Alves Theater, 26 May.

































A List of Ernst Widmers Students

1950s in Switzerland
01. Heiny Schuhmacher

1960s in Brazil
02. Milton Gomes
03. Jamary Oliveira
04. Fernando Cerqueira
05. Lindembergue Cardoso
06. Rinaldo Rossi
07. Nikolau Kokron
08. Antnio Jos Santana Martins (Tomz)
09. Carmen Mettig Rocha
10. Camel Abras
11. Miguel Huertas
12. Eduardo Vieira de Mello
13. Djalma Novais
14. Rafael de Menezes Bastos
15. Myrian Kobles Brasil
16. Carlos Rodrigues de Carvalho
17. Ilza Costa Nogueira
18. Lucemar de Alcntara
19. Henry Bong Foo Chu
20. Horst Schwebel
21. Ralph Waddey
22. Luis Eduardo
23. Maria do Carmo Correa
24. Tuz de Abreu
25. Moacyr Albuquerque
26. Antnio Renato Froes - Perna
27. Maria da Graa Santos
28. Roberto Solano de Freitas
29. Carlos Alberto Purificao
30. Marco Antnio Guimares

1970s in Brazil
31. Agnaldo Ribeiro
32. Juracy Cardoso
33. Franklin Oliveira
34. Daniel Damasceno
35. Luiz Oliveira Maia
36. Monclar Valverde
37. Jos Maria Freitas (Zeca Freitas)
38. Ruy Brasileiro Borges
39. Eunice Moura
40. Srgio Souto
41. Lindbergh Pires 46. Hans Jurgen Ludwig
42. Aderbal Duarte 47. Dilson Arajo Alves Peixoto
43. Thomas Gruetzmacher 48. lcio Rodrigues S
44. Andr Pelgio Bessa 49. Roberto Lus de Castro
45. Thomaz Oswald 50. Paulo Costa Lima

1980s in Brazil
51. Jos Roberto Alves Marfuz
52. Moiss Silva Gabrielli Filho
53. Wellington Gomes da Silva
54. Jos Coelho Barreto
55. Helder Rocha Leite
56. Dulce Barbosa dos Santos Carneiro
57. Paulo Chagas Ferreira
58. Renato Csar de Aguiar
59. Frederico Meireles Dantas
60. ngelo Tavares Castro
61. Celso Mendona de Aguiar
62. Hlio Bacelar Viana
63. Jos Carlos Carvalho de Mendona
64. Pedro Antnio de Oliveira
65. Almiro Mascarenhas Moura
66. Antnio Fernando Burgos Lima
67. Ccero Alves de Almeida Filho











