
WILLIAMS, TENNESSEE (1911-1983)

At the height of his powers, in the 1940s and 50s, Tennessee Williams not
only courted the commercial success afforded by Broadway, but also sought
to develop his own modernist aesthetic: an approach to all aspects of
dramatic staging that sought to capture the truth of experience more
faithfully than naturalism alone. He termed this his plastic theatre,
embodying as it did the creative malleability normally afforded art and
architecture.

Born in Columbus, Mississippi, Thomas Lanier Williams attended the
University of Missouri and Washington University in St. Louis before being
forced to work briefly in the shoe factory where his father had become a
manager during the Depression. This humbling experience helped to shape a
social visionchampioning the individual against the might of capitalist
oppressionand intensify the romantic appeal of the bohemian artist. In
part, it was this appeal that prompted Williams to adopt the name
Tennessee in 1938.

His early playsCandles to the Sun (1937), Fugitive Kind (1938), Not About
Nightingales (1938), and Stairs to the Roof (1941)developed Williams
agenda in the tradition of the political theatre popular in the 1930s,
especially the agitprop drama of Clifford Odets and the expressionist works
of Elmer Rice. Apprentice pieces, these plays were mainly performed by an
amateur company in St. Louis called The Mummers, under the direction of
Willard Holland.

After the failure of tryout performances and subsequent rewrites of
Williams first commercial venture, Battle of Angels (1940), the playwright
worked on The Glass Menagerie (1944), a resounding success, particularly
when it transferred from Chicago to Broadway. Though the social background
to the play is alluded to in the narrator Tom Wingfields opening speech,
Williams had by now chosen to mine more personal dramatic material: his
family. The character of Laura Wingfield would prove to be the first of
many representations of Williams sister Rose, and her shyness and
vulnerability dictate the quietness of this memory play.

Williams comprehensive production notes for The Glass Menagerie suggest
the influence of Brechtian modernism, gained through seminars given at the
Dramatic Workshop of the New School for Social Research, under the
directorship of Erwin Piscator, and silent films. Magic-lantern
slidesdispensed with by many productionsare intended to project images
and titles onto screens to clarify the writing and the episodic plot. Both
lighting and music, tailored to each character and freighted with meaning,
add to the sculptural effect or plasticity of the play, combining realism
and expressionism.

Williams followed up the success of The Glass Menagerie with A Streetcar
Named Desire (1947), a play that continued his method of mixing realism and
expressionism. Set in New Orleans, a city that increasingly became
Williams spiritual home following his first visit there at the end of
1938, Streetcar charts the decline of Blanche DuBois, a faded southern
belle who comes up against the Lawrentian antagonist Stanley Kowalski,
memorably played by a young Marlon Brando in both the Broadway premiere and
the film adaptation of 1951. Williams descriptions of the set evoke the
French Quarters lyricism, and a medley of soundsblue piano music, the
Varsouviana polka tune, jungle cries, and an approaching
locomotivecaptures mood and reflects Blanches nervousness as she
continues to be haunted by the memory of her husbands suicide and is
mentally and emotionally destroyed by Stanley.

The success of Streetcar (855 performances on Broadway) would not be
repeated, though Cat on a Hot Tin Roof (1955) earned the playwright a
second Pulitzer Prize. In between, Williams career stalled with Camino
Real (1953). Coming at the very end of the modernist era, this play
exhibits several characteristics of the movements writing: gratuitous
violence and an uncharted wasteland; characters drawn from history,
literature, and myth; and no obvious central plot, only episodic scenes or
blocks. Audiences were baffled by its surrealism and its veiled attack on
McCarthyism.

Williams symbolism, evident in Camino Real and the plays before it, would
also be a feature of his writing in the 1950s as he explored key themes
like mendacity, lost youth, violence, and homosexuality and continued to
create his fugitive kindbruised individuals fleeing conformity and
injustice. In 1957, while writing Suddenly Last Summer and after rewriting
Battle of Angels as Orpheus Descending, Williams underwent psychoanalysis
to alleviate clinical depression. This condition would deteriorate in the
1960s, however, a period that Williams called his stoned age, fuelled as
it was by a cocktail of prescription drugs and alcohol. The Night of the
Iguana (1961) marked his last Broadway success.

The plays that followed, forming the last phase of his career and
commencing with The Milk Train Doesnt Stop Here Anymore (1963), heralded a
new experimentalism. Williams incorporated elements of Japanese N theatre
in Milk Train and seems to have been influenced by both the Theatre of
Cruelty and the Theatre of the Absurd in one-acts like The Gndiges
Frulein (1966) and The Remarkable Rooming-House of Mme. Le Monde (1982),
with their mix of slapstick and extreme violence. Elsewhere, postmodern
features include: fractured, incomplete dialogue in The Bar of a Tokyo
Hotel (1969); the metatheatre of Out Cry (1971); and the manipulation of
memory through a double time frame in Vieux Carr (1977) and Something
Cloudy, Something Clear (1981). Increasingly performed off-Broadway, the
late plays were largely dismissed by critics at the time but have since
been reappraised by scholars.

List of Works

Williams, Tennessee. (1971-1992) The Theatre of Tennessee Williams, 8
vols., New York: New Directions.

------ (1998) Not About Nightingales, ed. Allean Hale, New York: New
Directions.

------ (2000) Stairs to the Roof, ed. Allean Hale, New York: New
Directions.

------ (2001) Fugitive Kind, ed. Allean Hale, New York: New Directions.

------ (2004) Candles to the Sun, ed. Dan Isaac, New York: New Directions.


References and Further Reading
Bigsby, C. W. E. (2000) Modern American Drama, 1945-2000, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Corrigan, Mary Ann. (1977) Beyond Verisimilitude: Echoes of Expressionism
in Williams Plays, in Tennessee Williams: A Tribute, ed. Jac Tharpe,
Jackson: University Press of Mississippi.
Hooper, Michael S. D. (2012) Sexual Politics in the Work of Tennessee
Williams: Desire Over Protest, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kolin, Philip C. (2000) A Streetcar Named Desire, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Leverich, Lyle. (1995) Tom: The Unknown Tennessee Williams, New York: W.W.
Norton.

Murphy, Brenda. (2014) The Theatre of Tennessee Williams, London:
Bloomsbury.

Savran, David. (1992) Communists, Cowboys, and Queers: The Politics of
Masculinity in the Works of Arthur Miller and Tennessee Williams,
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

Michael S. D. Hooper, St Margarets School


Recommended Illustrations

[pic]

Tennessee Williams
[Billy Rose Theatre Collection, New York Public Library. Available at:
http://digitalgallery.nypl.org/nypldigital/id?ps_the_cd100_1532]

[pic]

Cheryl Koski, Tyler Hollinger, and Matthew Carlson in an experimental
production of The Glass Menagerie at Triad Stage in Greensboro, North
Carolina in 2010.
[Available at:
http://www.indyweek.com/indyweek/ImageArchives?oid=1694013&by=1689357]


[pic]

Marlon Brando and Kim Hunter in the Broadway premiere of A Streetcar Named
Desire in 1947.
[Available at: http://life.time.com/culture/marlon-brando-in-a-streetcar-
named-desire-photos-from-broadway-1947/#3]

[pic]

Jules Irving and Beatrice Manley in a 1954 production of Camino Real at the
San Francisco Actors Workshop.
[Available at: http://www.beatricemanley.com/photogallery_camino.html]
