

Windrush [thumbnail]
A term used to describe the post-World War II generation of writers from
the English-speaking Caribbean who were published (and most often lived) in
Great Britain.  Although generally associated with postcolonial or
Caribbean literary studies, many of these writers  including authors such
as Wilson Harris, George Lamming, and Samuel Selvon  were seen by their
contemporaries as inheritors of the tradition of modernism.  Adapting the
formally experimental tendencies of prewar modernism to anti-colonial
critique, members of the Windrush generation were widely celebrated in the
British literary world as a vibrant new group of writers along the lines of
James Joyce, D. H. Lawrence, and Virginia Woolf.  Pioneering figures in the
emergence of Anglophone Caribbean literature, they also represent a lesser-
known strain of late modernism, one that seized on the unruly,
oppositional, and utopian energies characteristic of modernist writing and
focused them more firmly on issues of race, ethnicity, and empire.

Windrush
The name Windrush derives from the symbolic inaugural moment of
multicultural Britain:  the 1948 arrival of the ship MV Empire Windrush in
England with the first substantial group of West Indian immigrants of the
postwar era.  Over the next twelve years, more than a quarter of a million
more people from the British Caribbean colonies arrived, decisively
shifting the demographic makeup of Great Britain.  Among this migrant
population was an influential set of writers  the Windrush generation 
popularly credited with laying the foundation of modern Caribbean
literature in English.  Attracted most significantly by Caribbean Voices, a
radio literary magazine broadcast from London on the BBCs overseas
service, the Windrush authors quickly made their presence felt on the
British literary scene in the 1950s, publishing a number of novels that
drew attention as experimental works in the modernist tradition.

The inaugural Windrush novel is the Guyanese author Edgar Mittelholzers A
Morning at the Office, published in 1950 by Leonard Woolfs Hogarth Press.
Both its multi-perspectival narrative and its focus on the events of a
particular day reveal an affinity with Ulysses and Mrs. Dalloway. The novel
also employs its own formal innovation in which narrative action is
periodically interrupted by detailed historical accounts of everyday
objects surrounding the novels characters, suggesting the material
embeddedness of all human endeavour.  Among the remainder of Mittelholzers
prodigious literary output, the works most obviously indebted to modernism
are Latticed Echoes (1960) and Thunder Returning (1961), both of which
interpose intensely poetic, elliptical leitmotiv passages amongst their
otherwise conventional third-person narration.  The next three West Indian
authors to publish novels after A Morning at the Office also adopted
markedly modernist styles.  The Barbadian author George Lamming, in
particular, evoked comparisons to Joyce, due to the authors shared
commitment to uncovering the ideological interestedness of both language
and narrative form.  His first novel, In the Castle of My Skin (1953),
alternates between an introspective first-person and a deceptively
objective third-person narrator in order to reveal the process by which the
protagonist comes to recognize the insidious artifice of colonial
discourse.  Indeed, appearing throughout Lammings oeuvre  including The
Emigrants (1954) and Of Age and Innocence (1958)  is an interruptive
impulse characteristic of modernism, whereby the readers presumptions to
interpretive certainty are resisted by a dense, allusive writing style.
Lammings Trinidadian counterpart, Samuel Selvon (who arrived on the same
boat as Lamming), also composed an array of experimental works.  Selvons
second novel, An Island is a World (1955), for example, offers a multi-
layered narrative that makes abrupt, unmarked, and initially confusing
shifts between episodes involving different characters in an effort to
point up the deeply contingent, contextual nature of all interpretation.
His most famous novel, The Lonely Londoners (1956), enacts a similar, self-
reflexive message in the linguistic register.  By narrating in the modified
creole language of its characters, the novel makes assertive claims for the
legitimacy of what was thought of as a debased dialect while calling
attention to the arbitrariness of language more generally.  The next West
Indian to publish a novel in Britain, the Jamaican Roger Mais, likewise
displayed an affiliation with modernist techniques.  An avowed disciple of
D.H. Lawrence, Mais composed his first two novels, The Hills Were Joyful
Together (1953) and Brother Man (1954), with an eye toward the affective
force of word, sound, and image.  In them, Mais punctuates his otherwise
dispiriting portrayal of the suffering of Kingstons dispossessed poor with
a series of lyrical, incantatory sections, hoping to suggest the potential
socio-political power inhering in an awakened aesthetic sense.

Although their major works appear slightly later than the initial burst of
Windrush writing, the Guyanese novelist Wilson Harris and the Barbadian
poet Kamau (formerly Edward) Brathwaite are also important early
practitioners of Caribbean modernism.  Both the challengingly associative,
dream-like prose of Harris and the insistently counter-conventional poetry
of Brathwaite exhibit a modernist oppositionality expressed via a palpable
consciousness  and subsequent manipulation  of literary form (both
authors, not incidentally, pay explicit homage to T.S. Eliot in their
work).  Emerging at a time in British letters when the prestige of
modernism was under assault by figures like Kingsley Amis and Philip
Larkin, the Windrush writers laid claim, in diverse ways, to the
insurrectionary tendencies of modernism, solidifying the tradition of
Caribbean literature in English and paving the way for later experimental
writers from the region such as Erna Brodber and Caryl Phillips.  Both V.S.
Naipaul and Derek Walcott, though less obviously aligned with modernism at
the time, began their careers during this period as well.

References and further reading:
Brown, J. (2011) Modernism and Anglophone Caribbean Literature, The
Routledge Companion to Anglophone Caribbean Literature, eds. Michael A.
Bucknor and Alison Donnell, 295-303.  London: Routledge.

Emery, M. (2012) Caribbean Modernism: Plantation to Planetary, The Oxford
Handbook of Global Modernisms, ed. Mark Wollaeger, 48-77. New York: Oxford
University Press.

Gikandi, S. (1992) Writing in Limbo:  Modernism and Caribbean Literature,
Ithaca and London: Cornell University Press.

Kalliney, P. (2007) Metropolitan Modernism and Its West Indian
Interlocutors: 1950s London and the Emergence of Postcolonial Literature.
PMLA 122 (1): 89-104

Pollard, C. (2004) New World Modernisms:  T.S. Eliot, Derek Walcott, and
Kamau Brathwaite. Charlottesville and London: University of Virginia Press.


List of works:

Brathwaite, E. (1967) Rights of Passage.  Oxford:  Oxford University Press.

Harris, W. (1960) The Palace of the Peacock.  London:  Faber and Faber.

Lamming, G. (1953) In the Castle of My Skin.  London:  Michael Joseph.

------ (1954) The Emigrants.  London:  Michael Joseph.

------ (1958) Of Age and Innocence.  London:  Michael Joseph.

Mais, R. (1953) The Hills Were Joyful Together.  London:  Jonathan Cape.

------ (1954) Brother Man.  London:  Jonathan Cape.

Mittelholzer, E. (1950) A Morning at the Office. London: Hogarth Press.

------ (1960) Latticed Echoes. London: Secker & Warburg.

------ (1961) Thunder Returning.  London: Secker & Warburg.

Selvon, S. (1954) An Island is a World.  London:  Allan Wingate.

------ (1956) The Lonely Londoners.  London:  Allan Wingate.



[links, photos, etc.]

(oral histories of some passengers)
http://www.bbc.co.uk/history/british/modern/arrival_01.shtml

(portrait of Selvon)
http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/culturepicturegalleries/8340920/Ida-Kar-
The-Bohemian-Photographer.html?image=9


(portraits of Lamming can be found in the Hulton Archive of Getty Images)

(a commercial photo agency has some good pics of the first migrants)
http://www.topfoto.co.uk/imageflows/grid/?s=windrush

(the National Gallery of Jamaica has some jpegs from their collection of
Roger Maiss painting  itself modernist  for which the copyright has
expired:  if this sounds interesting, I can get in touch with them to
check)

(here are some things off YouTube that might be available in other venues?)
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9F6lsLRdZ-o
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ViGwxJloI70


Contributor: J. Dillon Brown
