
      The Yellow Book
      Georgia Clarkson Smith      976 words inc. references

      The Yellow Book was a London-based literary quarterly published from
1894 to 1897 by Elkin Matthews and John Lane that served to promote the
work of Bodley Head authors, artists,  and publications. The periodical was
edited by American Henry Harland and sub-edited by New Woman authors Ella
D'Arcy and Ethel Colburn Mayne. Aubrey Beardsley served as art director
until he was fired in April of 1895 in the wake of public controversy
regarding his friendship with Oscar Wilde. Although Lane took over the
artistic editorial duties with assistance from Patten Wilson at the time of
Beardsley's departure, the periodical maintained its Beardslian
aestheticmost notable in its provocative yellow-and-black
coversthroughout its run. John Lane served as sole publisher after
Matthews' s departure in September 1894. The Yellow Book is central to the
study of fin-de-sicle literary and visual culture as well as to
scholarship on gender and sexuality, Aestheticism, Decadence, and the New
Woman.
      The Yellow Book's distinctive cover was inspired by the period's
decadent volumes of illicit French fiction, bound in a garish yellow color
that had, in the words of Holbrook Jackson, come to be associated with all
that was bizarre and queer in art and life, and all that was outrageously
modern (The Yellow Nineties). The cloth-bound quarto, which sold for 5s,
published short stories, poetry, and essays, and celebrated the
contemporary arts with illustrations, portraits, and reproductions. Unlike
most periodicals of the period, The Yellow Book did not publish serialized
fiction and, hence, allowed for writers to experiment with the form and
content of the modern short story. The publication is well known for its
patronage of innovative New Woman authors such as Viola Paget, Olive
Custance, Charlotte Mew, Victoria Cross, George Egerton, and Marion
Hepworth Dixon, and as an outlet for realist authors to write free from
censorship of form or content. Lane and Matthews also published more
traditional material from authors such as Henry James, Edmund Gosse, H.G.
Wells, W.G. Yeats, George Gissing, and Walter Crane, among others.
Illustrations and reproductions were diverse and varied, but the editors
generally strove to feature a wide range of contemporary styles of
portraiture, impressionist studies, life drawings, book illustrations, and
decorative art nouveau work. The periodical regularly featured work from
art editors Beardsley and Wilson.
       Simon Houfe has called The Yellow Book both a microcosm of the fin-
de-sicle and an important trend setter in periodical, literary, and
visual culture (Yellow Nineties). The periodical introduced a new aesthetic
that intentionally broke away from the Victorian style and paved the way
for the distinctively avant-garde little magazines of the modern era. The
publisher's first prospectus announced that Yellow Book was to be a
celebration of the book as object, beautiful as a piece of bookmaking
(Doran). In addition to its distinguishable cloth binding and peculiar
square shape, the periodical was formatted with the irregular Caslon
typeface in single-column print with catchwords at the bottom of each page.
Its revivalist typographic style was uniquely contrasted with its very
modern embrace of white space, use of asymmetrical titles, and embellished
margins. To further aesthetically distance the publication from the visual
chaos of the Victorian periodical, the publishers segregated text and art
into distinct spaces, separating illustrations and reproductions from the
text by fly-title pages and tissue-paper inserts so that the art would
stand alone rather than act as illustrative second to literary material.
The Yellow Book ran no advertisements other than a brief publisher's list
at back, which primarily marketed Bodley Head editions.
      While The Yellow Book made intentional use of an elite aesthetic, it
was marketed to and priced for the common middle-class reader who wished to
feel a part of an elite strata of literary and artistic innovators. While
based in London, the periodical was published, marketed, and reviewed in
the United States and the British Isles, and had a large transatlantic
readership. Though the quarterly published only a total of thirteen
editions, its innovations in form and content had a lasting impact on
transatlantic literary and periodical culture.


References and Further Reading

The Artists of The Yellow Book and the Circle of Oscar Wilde. London:
   Clarendon Gallery, 1983.

Brake, Laurel. Endgames: The Politics of The Yellow Book, or Decadence,
   Gender and Journalism.The Endings of Epochs. Ed. Laurel Brake.
   Rochester, NY: Boydell and Brewer, 1995: 38-65.

Chan, Winnie. An Aristocracy of Talent: The Short Story in The Yellow
   Book. The Economy of the Short Story in British Periodicals of the
   1890s. New York: Routledge, 2007. 53-99.

Doran, Sabine. The Culture of Yellow or the Visual Politics of Late
   Modernity. NY: Bloomsbury Academic, 2013.

Houfe, Simon. Fin de Siecle: The Illustrators of the Nineties. London:
   Barrie & Jenkins, 1992.

Hughes, Linda K. Women Poets and Contested Spaces in The Yellow Book.
   Studies in English Literature 44 (2004): 849-72.

Lasner, Mark Samuels. The Yellow Book: A Checklist and Index. London:
   Eighteen Nineties Society, 1998.

Ledger, Sally. Wilde Women and The Yellow Book: The Sexual Politics of
   Aestheticism and Decadence. English Literature in Transition 50.1
   (2007): 5-26.

Nelson, Carolyn Christensen. Fiction Written by Women for The Yellow
   Book. British Women Fiction Writers of the 1890s. New York: Twayne,
   1996. 80-94.

Stetz, Margaret D., and Mark Samuels Lasner. The Yellow Book: A Centenary
   Exhibition. Cambridge: Harvard UP, 2005.

Stetz, Margaret D. Debating Aestheticism from a Feminist
   Perspective.Women and British Aestheticism. Ed. Talia Schaffer and
   Kathy Alexis Psomiades. Charlottesville: UP of Virginia, 1999. 25-43.

Symons, A.J.A. An Unacknowledged Moment in Fine Printing: The Typography
   of the Eighteen Nineties. Fleuron 7 (1930): 83-119.

Windholz, Anne M. The Woman Who Would Be Editor: Ella DArcy and The
   Yellow Book. Victorian Periodicals Review 29.2 (1996): 116-30.

The Yellow Nineties Online. Ed. Dennis Dennisoff and Loraine Janzen
   Kooistra. Web. (includes archived digital copies of YB)


