Taylor & Francis – Encyclopedia of Modernism



About you

[Salutation]

V.

[Middle name]

Sanil



[Enter your biography]



Indian Institute of Technology



Your article

Zacharia, Paul (b. 1945)

[Enter any variant forms of your headword – OPTIONAL]

Paul Zacharia, a short story writer, novelist and essayist, brought the light of counter modernity to Malayalam literature in the late 1960s. He rejected the self-definition of western modernity and its Indian nationalist versions. Drawing upon the clarity of vernacular biblical idioms and the intelligence of everyday rural life, Zacharia has probed the fragile certainties of urban life and intellectual establishments and religious orthodoxies. He has acknowledged that ‘Jesus Christ, cinema, bars, friends, lovers, hens and dogs have given me stories’.

Paul Zacharia, a short story writer, novelist and essayist, brought the light of counter modernity to Malayalam literature in the late 1960s. He rejected the self-definition of western modernity and its Indian nationalist versions. Drawing upon the clarity of vernacular biblical idioms and the intelligence of everyday rural life, Zacharia has probed the fragile certainties of urban life and intellectual establishments and religious orthodoxies. He has acknowledged that ‘Jesus Christ, cinema, bars, friends, lovers, hens and dogs have given me stories’.

File: Zacharia.jpg

Figure 1.

Source: http://im.rediff.com/news/2010/jan/20paul.jpg





Zacharia was born in the village Urulikunnam near Kottayam, and published his first story ‘Unni the Child’ in 1964. Zachariayude Kathakal, the collection of his short stories written till 2000, won the Sahitya Akademi Award in 2006. Two of his novellas (Praise the Lord and Enthondu Visesham Pilathose?) have been translated into English. Two short story collections are also available in English (Bhaskara Pattelar and Other Stories and Reflections of a Hen in Her Last Hour and Other Stories). Vidheyan (The Servile) a film which won the national award for the best Malayalam film 1993 (directed by Adoor Goplala Krishnan) was an adaptation of Zacharia’s story Bhaskara Pattelarum Ente Jeevithavum. Zacharia has been active in the print media and publishing. He was one of the founders of the Asianet television network. 

For Zacharia God is not dead. He is the virtual existence of contingency that sustains and disrupts all structures. God’s ridiculous apparitions - as peeping Tom where ladies bathe, as an Egyptian belly dancer or the mew of a cat - redeem the stories from the sense of ending and place them across the punch lines of a laughter that erects strict equality between the god and other beings. 

What News, Pilate? takes the form of an extended correspondence between Pontius Pilate and Titus Antonius. Ruth, Pilate’s secretary during a letter-writing session, plays a game of pretence with the old Pilate, exposing her pretty leg to him. As punishment, her sandals pinch her feet on her way to witness the resurrection of Christ. Her feet are redeemed only by the touch of Christ. Zacharia’s women characters are force fields for the secure and graceful descent of God; they are prismatic presences through which all speech has to pass to engender interiorities of both men and women.

As a public intellectual, Zacharia has challenged right wing Hindu nationalists, the business empires of the Church, the spiritualist industry, and political terror. He writes on contemporary issues for newspapers and periodicals in both English and Malayalam. He has travelled widely in India and to 43 countries abroad and has published travelogues on East Africa, the Lake District, England, Saudi Arabia and China. His travelogues are imaginative ethnographies of expatriate Malayalees from all over the world.



Works

In Malayalam



Short Stories

Salaam America: Kathakal, 1998.

Aarkariyam: Kathakal, 1998.

Kannadi Kanmolavum: Kathakal, 2000.

Zachariayude Kathakal, 2002.

Enthundu visesham, Pilathose, 1996.

Oru Nasrani Youvavum Gaulisastraum, 

Oridathu,

Kanya Kumari

Zachariayude Penkathakal

Zakharia’s Jeshu

Ente Preeyappetta Kathakal



Novellas

Praise the Lord 

Ishtikayum Aashariyum 

Ithanente Peru 

Bhaskarapattelarum Ente Jeevithavum 



Travelogues

Oru African Yatra

Agniparvathangalude Thazhvarayil

Thatakanadu

Nabiyude Nattil



Essays

Govindam Bhaja Moodamathee



Screen Play

Joseph oru Purohithan.



In English

Bhaskara Pattelar and Other Stories, Chennai: Manas Books, 1992.

Reflections of a Hen in Her Last Hour and Other Stories, New Delhi: Penguin India, 1999.

Praise the Lord and What News, Pilate?: Two Novellas, New Delhi: Katha, 2002.

 

Timeline

1964: First story (Unny the child) published. Bachelor’s Degree from St. Philomena’s College, Mysore.

1966: Post Graduate Degree from Central College Bangalore.

1969: First collection of short stories published.

1972: Moved to New Delhi and worked in publishing and media

1992: Returned to Kerala 

1993: Vidheyan (The Servile) a film based on Zacharia’s story won the National Award for the Best film.

2006: Zachariayude Kathakal won the Sahitya Akademi Award

Further reading:

(Jose)

(Kanak News)