Taylor & Francis – Encyclopedia of Modernism



About you

[Salutation]

Anthony

[Middle name]

Shay



[Enter your biography]



Pomona College



Your article

Zeybek

[Enter any variant forms of your headword – OPTIONAL]

The zeybek is a genre of Turkish folk dance that is closely associated with the Aegean region on the west coast of Anatolian Turkey, although it is found in other regions as well. It can be seen as an early twentieth-century attempt to ‘modernize’ folk dance in Turkey. There are many versions of this dance. Usually, the zeybek is performed by a solo male dancer, though dance can also be performed by two or more males. Although less common, there are a few female zeybek dances. There is also a Greek form of this dance, and an urban form—the zeibekikos—that was brought to Greece by Greeks from Izmir (Smyrna). 

Summary



The zeybek is a genre of Turkish folk dance that is closely associated with the Aegean region on the west coast of Anatolian Turkey, although it is found in other regions as well. It can be seen as an early twentieth-century attempt to ‘modernize’ folk dance in Turkey. There are many versions of this dance. Usually, the zeybek is performed by a solo male dancer, though dance can also be performed by two or more males. Although less common, there are a few female zeybek dances. There is also a Greek form of this dance, and an urban form—the zeibekikos—that was brought to Greece by Greeks from Izmir (Smyrna). 



Contributions to Modernism and Modernization

The Ottoman government sent Selim Sırrı Tarcan, one of the earliest researchers of Turkish folk dances, to Sweden in 1909 to study physical education, and he was much struck by the ways in which Swedish instructors choreographed folk dances in a ‘refined’ way. In 1916, he choreographed the zeybek, which he called Tarcan zeybeği, to appeal to a sophisticated urban Turkish audience. During the 1930s, Mustafa Kemal Atatürk, the first President of Turkey, encouraged him to create a social ballroom dance to be danced using a man and a woman, and that this dance, Tarcan zebeği, would become the ‘Turkish national dance’ (Öztürkmen 2002). Neither of these dreams was realized. This modernization of the zeybek dance was never fully embraced in Turkey because of the nationalistic and ethnic appeal that staged traditional folk dances had for Turkish audiences.



The best known version of the dance is performed as a solo, usually by a man wearing a striking and unique costume of short embroidered baggy pants and shirt, over which a short jacket and embroidered vest is worn. Two vestigial sleeves hang down from the dancer’s shoulders giving the appearance of wings. An elaborate headpiece, broad ornamental belt and embroidered leggings complete the ensemble. The wing effect is not happenstance, for as Turkish dance scholar Cemil Demirsipahi shows in his authoritative book on Turkish folk dance, the original solo dance seems to imitate the movements of a bird (1975, 358-360).



The solo zeybek is performed slowly, beginning with an introduction in which the dancer uses walking step as if testing the ground. This introduction is followed by kneeling and swooping movements, with his hands held out to the sides at shoulder level, while the dancer continuously snaps his fingers. In addition to the solo version of the dance the zeybek has several variants, in a pair, or group dance. Often during the group dance, the dancers each perform their own solo version as well as zeybeks for women. The dance is most commonly performed to some version of a nine rhythm: 9/8; 9/4; 9/2, and 18/4, but Demirsipahi also notes rarer 2/4 and 4/2 examples.



[Note on Paratextual Material

Photos exist in publications about Turkish folk dances. The And volume above has one. Dr. Shay does not have a photo of the zeybek created by Tarcan, however since he choreographed it during the period before 1923.]

Further reading:

 (And)



(Demirsipahi)



(Öztürkmen)