
Zorn, John (1953-)
Dustin Garlitz

John Zorn is an American AVANT-GARDE saxophonist and composer.  Zorn
performs on alto saxophone and is one of the leadings figures on New York
Citys Downtown scene of AVANT-GARDE music.  Zorn has recorded on major
record labels and releases music on his own independent experimental record
label, Tzadik.  His Jewish inspired piano-less jazz quartet Masada, one
such small combo instrumentation first made popular in 1959 by AVANT-GARDE
jazz alto saxophonist and composer ORNETTE COLEMAN, was considered one of
the leading small bands in jazz in the 1990s and 2000s, and has recorded
dozens of his compositions on many volumes of album releases.  Zorn has
focused on East Asian influences in new music, especially traditional
Japanese influences.  These and other East-Asian influences were evident in
his work as early as the early 1980s.  He has also spent time producing
albums by contemporary Japanese noise or sound artists, and has performed
and recoded with them on those musical releases as well.  He has devoted
time in his artistic career to composing music for independent films, and
more notably, has released many volumes of film-inspired musical works,
mostly on his own record label.

      John Zorn was born September 2, 1953 in New York City.  He was brought
up in a traditional Jewish family in the New York City borough of Queens.
He attended college in St. Louis at Webster University, where he first
studied composition.  He subsequently discovered the AVANT-GARDE jazz of
alto saxophonist and composer Ornette Coleman there, and he soon became a
major influence in Zorns musical orientation.  Zorn returned to New York
City in the mid 1970s and settled in the East Village of Manhattan, where a
fledgling Downtown Music scene had developed from an earlier Jazz Loft
scene begun by the likes of COLEMAN in the late 1960s and early 1970s,
nearby in neighborhoods such as Soho.  Zorn released albums of his solo
saxophone and reeds work, The Classic Guide to Strategy (Volume 1, 1983).
Zorns early career free improvisation in small group settings featured
improvisers and sound artists such as Christian Marclay, as documented on
Zorns album Locus Solus (1983).  Abstract, improvisational game pieces
were devised by Zorn on Cobra (1984), and other releases from the time
period.  Ganryu Island (1984) documented his engagement with traditional
East-Asian musical influences.


      Zorn recorded an album of Ornette Colemans compositions in a punk
rock setting, Spy vs. Spy (1989).  His band Naked City performed AVANT-
GARDE music with hardcore punk and thrash metal influences in the late
1980s and early 1990s, with a self titled released in 1989, and other major
releases in 1989, 1992, and 1993.  Zorn was one of the founding members of
the band Painkiller, originally formed in 1991.  Painkiller combined avant-
garde jazz with experimental rock and death metal.  They were active from
1991 to 1995, with albums released in 1991 to 1994.


      Zorns Downtown New York arts peer, playwright Richard Foreman, set a
new work of AVANT-GARDE theatre to his musical compositions in 2009.  New
music composer Laurie Anderson and musician Lou Reed have both worked with
Zorn.  Zorn opened his own new music venue, the Stone, in New York City on
Downtowns Manhattan East Side.  The club worked exclusively on an artist
curatorial basis, but in 2013 it switched formats and began offering a
stint of artist residencies.


      In the 2000s, Zorn started publishing edited volumes of writing on
AVANT-GARDE music written by musicians of new music themselves, and its
multiple volumes have extended into the 2010s.  He has composed for
strings, and such compositions have been commissioned and performed by
symphonies at concert halls including the New York Philharmonic at Lincoln
Center.  His musical works were performed at New Yorks Guggenheim Museum
in 2008.  Classical spans in Zorns musical career began as early as the
1990s, notably in his release of Aporias: Requia for Piano and Orchestra
(1998).  He has composed and recorded chamber music as well.  Zorn has
dedicated and titled AVANT-GARDE compositions for a wide variety of leading
figures in modernism, including Marguerite Duras, Marcel Duchamp, Artonin
Artaud, Paul Celan, Paul Verlaine, Charles Baudelaire and Arnold
Schoenberg.


      Zorns artistic engagement with radical Jewish culture was documented
as early as his release Kristallnacht (1993).  His Jewish themed jazz
quartet Masada gained wide acclaim and popularity in the 1990s and 2000s,
and he has also composed for a Masada String Trio, and a Bar Kohkba Sextet
that features the Masada String Trio accompanied by percussion and electric
guitar.  Zorns Masada String Trio and Bar Kohkba Sextet released a noted
double album for his independent label Tzadik, The Circle Maker, in 1998.
Zorn has recently turned to an Electric Masada project, in which he
continues to perform the Hebrew titled compositions he first recorded with
the acoustic Masada jazz quartet beginning in the early 1990s.  He has
recently also focused on composing, recording, and releasing numerous
volumes of Filmworks.

References and Further Readings:

Brackett, J. (2008) John Zorn: Tradition and Transgression, Bloomington and
London: Indiana University Press.

Gioia, T. (1997) The History of Jazz, New York and Oxford: Oxford
University Press.

Mandel, H. (2000) Future Jazz, New York and Oxford: Oxford University
Press.

Edited Volumes:

Zorn, J., (ed.), (2000) Arcana: Musicians on Music, New York: Hips Road.

____  (2007) Arcana II: Musicians on Music, New York: Hips Road/Tzadik.

____  (2008) Arcana III: Musicians on Music, New York: Hips Road/Tzadik.

____  (2009) Arcana IV: Musicians on Music, New York: Hips Road/Tzadik.

____  (2010) Arcana V: Musicians on Music, Magic and Mysticism, New York:
Hips Road/Tzadik.

____  (2012) Arcana VI: Musicians on Music, New York: Hips Road/Tzadik.

Dustin Garlitz
University of South Florida
