
ZOSHCHENKO, Mikhail Michailovich (,  ) (1894-1958)

Prose  writer  of  short-stories  and  tales,  sometimes   autobiographical,
feuilletonist, memoirist and dramatist. Member of  the  writers  collective
the SERAPION BROTHERS. Best known for his  hilarious  lampooning  of  Soviet
bureaucracy and the rampant scam artists of the 1920s.  In  the  1930s,  his
works were increasingly subjected to  censorship  and  criticism.  Evacuated
from Leningrad, he spent part of the war in Alma Ata (Kazakhstan).  In  1946
his career was dramatically curtailed by  Party  statesman  Andrei  Zhdanov,
who led a public campaign of criticism against Zoshchenko and the poet  Anna
AKHMATOVA. Deprived of his membership in  the  Soviet  Writers  Union,  and
hence his right to earn a living as an author, Zoshchenko died in 1958.

[pic]

Timeline of Life and Works
1894 Was born into a family of artists in St Petersburg.
1913 Finished high school and began studying law, but was expelled after
falling too far behind.
1914 Served in the Tsars army, reaching the rank of captain.
1917 Awarded five times for bravery on the battlefield.
1919 Volunteered for the Red Army. Worked at the port of Petrograd.
1921 Published his first book, Stories of Nazar Ilich, Mr Bluebelly.
1924 Aristokratka.
1925 The Adventures of a Monkey.
1926 Dear Citizens.
1927 What the Nightingale Sang About; Sentimental Stories; Nervous people.
1928 Who Are You Laughing At.
1929 Letters to a Writer.
1930 Michel Sinjagin.
1934 Took part in the White Sea  Baltic Canal expedition; published
Istoriia odnoi perekovki.
1933 Youth Restored.
1934-35 The Sky-Blue Book.
1937 Shestaia povest I.P. Belkina (The Sixth povest of Belkin); Talisman.
1941 Stories about Lenin. Volunteered for the Red Army but was invalided
out.
1943 Published the first and second parts of Before Sunrise under the title
The Story about Reason. Povest o razume (the full edition came out in
1972).
1944 Heavily criticised by the regime.
1946 Resolution On the Journals Zvezda and Leningrad published on August
14th. Accused by Andrei Zhdanov of cosmopolitism and parasitism. Expelled
from the Writers Union on September 4th.
1946-1953 Barely scraped by thanks to translation jobs; carried on writing.
His Partisan Tales were accepted by the magazine Novii Mir.
1953 Re-admitted to the Writers Union, but not rehabilitated.
1958 Died and was buried in Sestroretsk on June 22nd.

One of Soviet Russias most famous short story writers, Zoshchenko was  born
into a family of artists in St. Petersburg in 1894. His teenage  years  were
plagued by poverty, academic failure and at least one  suicide  attempt.  He
eventually took up law but never graduated. In  1914,  at  the  outbreak  of
World War I, he volunteered for the Tsars army and was sent to  the  front;
after sustaining an injury he was decorated and discharged with the rank  of
captain. In 1919 he volunteered for the  Red  Army  but  was  invalided  out
later that year. He married in 1920 and welcomed his first  child  in  1921,
when he moved definitely to Petrograd. Here  he  bonded  with  the  SERAPION
BROTHERS, a writers group that refused  to  bend  their  art  to  political
influence. Much like the Formalist writers and critics  they  mingled  with,
they were keen on the renewal of literary processes. Zoshchenko  carried  on
publishing short stories and feuilletons, and soon reached  fame  thanks  to
his original, satirical style.  Zoshchenkos  stories  are  populated  by  a
multitude of memorable characters that reflect Soviet reality under  Lenins
New  Economic  Policy  (1921-29):  primitive,  ignorant,  jealous,  uncouth,
touchy figures quick to take offence or even get physical  to  defend  their
hard-earned  earthly  goods.  They  speak  a  pastiche  of  clumsy  jargons,
neologisms and acronyms, lumped  together  with  the  bureaucratic  language
that had become a part of the middle and  lower  classes  everyday  speech;
the outcome is often hilarious. They are  not  vestiges  of  the  past  but,
rather, the  disturbing  prototypes  of  a  homo  sovieticus  in  the  works
swallowed up by an increasingly grotesque reality; indeed the  plots,  based
mostly  on  plausible   situations,   end   up   pushing   the   limits   of
verisimilitude. In the 1920s he immediately became a  beloved  author  whose
readers recognised the mindset, the moods and especially the speech  of  his
characters as being closer to the surrounding reality than images pushed  in
proto-socialist realist novels such as Gladkovs Cement (1925).  His  books,
unanimously recognised as masterpieces of the  humour  genre,  became  best-
sellers  the collection Dear Citizens was reprinted  more  than  ten  times
between 1925 and 1928  but not all the critics loved him. To  contrast  the
growing criticism against his  use  of  skaz  (a  narration  based  in  oral
speech, especially slang), in 1929 Zoshchenko took up the documentary  genre
and published Letters to a Writer. Here, he comments on  but never  censors
  a  collection  of  letters  or  even  simple  cards  sourced   from   his
correspondence with his readers. It was an  explicit  attempt  to  show  his
earnest bond with the masses and an implicit attempt  to  offer  the  common
reader a channel of expression that was not mediated by censorship.
In the 1930s, he  complemented  his  short  stories  with  works  where  the
introspection of his poetics became more apparent. Youth Restored  came  out
in 1933 in the magazine Zvezda, drawing such negative  reviews  that  writer
and actitivist Maxim GORKY himself would ask Glavlit (the Soviet  agency  in
charge of literary censorship) to withdraw it. In 1934 he began  serialising
The Sky-Blue Book, a historical-philosophical treatise on life  issues  such
as milestones in history, fame, love, treachery and money. Not even  History
of a Reforged Man  Zoshchenkos account of a  visit  to  the  penal  colony
whose prisoners were building the White Sea-Baltic Canal  could shield  The
Sky-Blue Book from attack. After just two episodes,  the  magazine  Oktyabr
was forced  to  suspend  the  publication  of  Before  Sunrise,  a  sort  of
autobiography  immediately  declared  foreign  to  the  interests  of   the
masses. The second part was published posthumously, in  1972.  Zoshchenkos
introspective analysis, his interest in  the  subconscious  and  his  ironic
style flew in the face of socialist realism, and it was  only  a  matter  of
time before his work was banned. Gorkys death in 1936 deprived  him  of  an
important supporter. In 1941 he volunteered for the Red Army but, again,  he
was invalided out. Having been evacuated from Leningrad  during  the  Siege,
he was forced to seek refuge in Alma Ata (Kazakhstan). In 1943  he  returned
to Moscow. In 1946 Zoshchenko and the poet Anna AKHMATOVA were  singled  out
for public attack by influential Soviet statesman Andrei Zhdanov.  This  put
an end to Zoshchenkos social and artistic life; he eventually  passed  away
in 1958 after years of physical and moral suffering.  His  final  works  are
crucial in order to understand aspects of socialist realism  that  have  yet
to be thoroughly investigated.

References and Further Reading

Biography

Mikhail Zoshchenko v vospominaniiakh sovremennikov, ed. By A. Smolian and
N. Iurgevna, Moscow: Sovetskii pisatel, 1981.

Mikhail Zoshchenko. Materialy k tvorcheskoi biografii, vols.1-2-3, ed. by
N.A. Groznova, Sankt-Peterburg: Nauka, 1997-2002.

Iu. V. Tomashevskii, Literatura  proizvodstvoe opasnoe.  M.  Zoshchenko:
zhizn, tvorchestvo,  sudba, Moscow: Iz. Indrik, 2004.


Selection of Critical Works

Mastera sovremennoi literatury, ed.  by  B.V.  Kazanski  and  Iu.  Tynianov,
Leningrad, 1928.

M.O. Chudakova, Poetika Mikhaila Zoshchenko, Moscow: Nauka 1979. A  landmark
in the studies devoted to Zoshchenko recently reprinted with an  interesting
post-scriptum: M.O. Chudakova, Poetika Mikhaila Zoshchenko  in  Literatura
sovetskogo proshlogo, Moscow: Iazyki russkoi kultury 2001, pp. 79 -244.

Iu.  M.  Shcheglov,  Entsiklopediia  nekulturnosti.  In  Mir   Avtora   i
struktura teksta: stati o russkoi literature,  ed.  by  A.  K.  Zholkovsky.
Tenafly,  N.J.:  Hermitage,  1986.  An  essential  work  to  understand  the
mentality of Zoshchenkos characters.

L. Scatton, Mikhail Zoshchenko. Evolution of a Writer, Cambridge  University
Press, 1993.

G. Carleton, The Politics of reception. Critical  Constructions  of  Mikhail
Zoshchenko. Evanston,  Illinois:  Northwestern  University  Press,  1998.  A
innovative study of the difficulties to understand the Zoshchenkos role  in
the Soviet literature.

A. K. Zholkovsky, Mikhail Zoshchenko: Poetika  nedoveriia,  Moscow:  Iazyki
russkoi kultury, 1999.

L. Milne, Zoshchenko and  the  Ilf-Petrov  Partnership:  How  they  Laughed,
Birmingham: Dept. of Russian, University of Birmingham, 2003.

E. A. Papazian, Ironic Mode. Mikhail  Zoshchenkos  Reconstruction  of  the
Reader in Manifacturing Truth.  The  Documentary  Moment  in  Early  Soviet
Literature. DeKalb, Illinois: Northern Illinois University Press, 2009.  The
essay enlightens  the contraddictory function of the Letters to a Writer  in
the context of 1930s Soviet literature.

Major Editions
Sobranie sochinenii  vols. 1-6, Leningrad 1929-31.

Izbrannye proizvedeniia 1923-1945, Leningrad 1946.

Sobranie  sochinenii,  3  vols.  Edited  by  Iu.  Tomashevskii,   Leningrad:
Khudozhestvennaia literatura, 1986-87.

Maloe sobranie sochinenii, Sankt-Peterburg:  Izd. Gruppa  Azbuka-klassika,
2010.

Other resources
Mikhail Zoshchenko. Fond 501. Sankt-Peterburg: Institut  russkoi  literatury
(Pushkinskii dom)
Mikhail Zoshchenko. http://www.museum.ru/M135
Mikhail Zoshchenko. http://muzej-zocshenko.livejournal.com/

Ornella Discacciati, University of Tuscia Viterbo Italy

http://www.sovlit.net/3zoshchenkos/

[pic]

                                                                       [pic]
